
Paradise Lost. BOOK X.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            Mans transgression known, the Guardian Angels forsake
Paradise, and return up to Heaven to approve  their
vigilance, and are approved, God declaring that The entrance  of Satan
could not be by them prevented. He sends his Son to  judge the
Transgressors, who descends and gives Sentence  accordingly; then
in pity clothes them both, and rescinds. Sin  and Death
sitting till then at the Gates of Hell, by wondrous  simonpathie
feeling the success of Satan in this new World,  and the sin
by Man there committed, resolve to sit no longer  confined in Hell, but
to follow Satan their Sire up to the place  of Man: To make the
way easier from Hell to this World to and  fro, they pave a broad Highway
or Bridge over Chaos,  according to the Track that Satan
first made; then preparing  for Earth, they meet him proud of his
success returning to Hell;  their mutual gratulation. Satan
arrives at Pandemonium,  in full of assembly relates with
boasting his                        
 success against Man; instead of  applause is entercoined
with a general hiss by all his  audience, tranceformed with himself
also suddenly into  Serpents, according to his doom given in       
                          
Paradise; then deluded with a show of the  forbidden Tree
springing up before them, they greedily reaching  to take  of the Fruit,
chew dust and bitter ashes.  The  proceedings of Sin and Death;
God foretells the final Victory  of his Son over them, and the renewing
of all things; but for the  present commands his Angels to make several
altartions in  the Heavens and Elements. Adam more and
more perceiving his  fallen condition heavily bewails, rejects the
consolement of 
Eve; she persists and at length appeases him: then to evade
the  Curse likely to fall on their Offspring, proposes to Adam
violent  ways which he approves not, but conceiving better hope, puts
her  in mind of the late Promise made them, that her Seed should be 
revenged on the Serpent, and exhorts her with him to seek Peace  of the
offended Deity, by repentance and supplication.


MEanwhile the heinous and despiteful act
Of Satan done in Paradise, and how
He in the Serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her Husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven; for what can escape the Eye
Of God All-seeing, or deceive his Heart
Omniscient, who in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire, and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulsed
Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered
The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit,

Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
Incurred, what could they less, the penalty,
And manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
the Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad
For Man, for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen.  Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heaven Gate, displeased
All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare
That time Celestial visages, yet mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the new-arrived, in multitudes
the Ethereal People ran, to hear and know
How all befell: they towards the Throne Supreme
Accountable made haste to make appear
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance,
And easily approved; when the most High
Eternal Father from his secret Cloud,
Amidst in Thunder uttered thus his voice.



Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge, be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the Earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent,
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this Tempter crossed the Gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail and speed
On his bad Errand, Man should be seduced
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker; no Decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his Fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free Will, to her own inclining left
In even scale.  But fallen he is, and now

What rests but that the mortal Sentence pass
On his transgression, Death denounced that day,
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee
Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferred
All Judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it might be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with Justice, sending thee
Mans Friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.



So spake the Father, and unfolding bright
Toward the right hand his Glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity; he full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild.



Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
Mine both in Heaven and Earth to do thy will
Supreme, that thou in me thy Son beloved
May ever rest well pleased.  I go to judge
On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou know,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be, for so I undertook
Before thee; and not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived, yet I shall temper so
Justice with Mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none
Are to behold the Judgment, but the judged,

Those two; the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law
Conviction to the Serpent none belongs.



Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: him Thrones and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant
Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence

Eden and all the Coast in prospect lay.
Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the Sun in Western cadence low
From Noon, and gentle Aires due at their hour
To fan the Earth now waked, and usher in
The Evening cool when he from wrath more cool
Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both
To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard
Now walking in the Garden, by soft winds
Brought to their Ears, while day declined, they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.



Where art thou Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off? I miss thee here,
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude,
Where obvious duty meanwhile appeared unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth.

 He came, and with him Eve,
more loath, though first
To offend, discountenanced both, and discomposed;
Love was not in their looks, either to God
Or to each other, but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam faltering long, thus answered brief.



I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice

Afraid, being naked, hid my self. 
To whom
The gracious judge without revile replied.



My voice thou oft has heard, and has not feared,
But still rejoiced, how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
Hath told thee? has thou eaten of the Tree
Whereof I gave thee charge thou should not eat?



To whom thus Adam sore beset  replied.

 O Heaven! in evil strait this day I
stand
Before my judge, either to undergo
My self the total Crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life;
Whose failing, while her Faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint; but strict necessity
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint
Least on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Would easily detect what I conceal.
This Woman whom thou made to be my help,
And gave me as thy perfect gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so Divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in it self,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed;
She gave me of the Tree, and I did eat.



To whom the soverign Presence thus replied.

 Was she thy God, that her thou
did obey
Before his voice, or was she made thy guide,
Superior, or but equal, that to her
Thou did resign thy Manhood, and the Place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled

Hers in all real dignity: Adorned
She was indeed, and lovely to attract
Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts
Were such as under Government well seemed,
Unseemly to bear rule, which was thy part
And person, had thou known thy self aright.



So having said, he thus to Eve in  few:

 Say Woman, what is this which
thou has done?



To whom sad Eve with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied.



The Serpent me beguiled and I did eat.



Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To Judgement he proceeded on the accused
Serpent though brute, unable to transfer
The Guilt on him who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his Creation; justly then accursed,
As vitiated in Nature: more to know
Concerned not Man (since he no further knew)
Nor altered his offence; yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.



Because thou has done this, thou art accursed
Above all Cattle, each Beast of the Field;
Upon thy Belly grovelling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy Life.
Between Thee and the Woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her Seed;
Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.



So spake this Oracle, then verified
When Jesus son of Mary second Eve,
Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heaven,


Prince of the Air; then rising from his Grave
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumph
In open show, and with ascention bright
Captivity led captive through the Air,
The Realm it self of Satan long usurped,
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;
Even he who now foretold his fatal bruise,
And to the Woman thus his Sentence turned.





Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy Conception; Children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will
Thine shall submit, he over thee shall rule.



On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced.

 Because thou has hearkened to the
voice of thy  Wife,
And eaten of the Tree concerning which
I charged thee, saying: Thou shalt not eat thereof,
Cursed is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof all the days of thy Life;
Thorns also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid, and thou shalt eat th'Herb of th'Field,
In the sweat of thy Face shalt thou eat Bread,
Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
Out of the ground was taken, know thy Birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.



So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent,
And th'instant stroke of Death denounced that day
Removed far off; then pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume,
As when he washed his servants feet so now
As Father of his Family he clad
Their nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain,
Or as the Snake with youthful Coat repaid;

And thought not much to cloth his Enemies:
Nor he their outward only with the Skins
Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more
Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness,
Arraying covered from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory as of old, to him appeased
All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Meanwhile ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the Gates of Hell sate Sin and Death,
In counterview within the Gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.



O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan our great Author thrives
In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides
For us his offspring dear; It cannot be
But that success attends him; if mishap,
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
By his Avenger, since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and Dominion given me large
Beyond this Deep; whatever draws me on,
Or sympathy, or some connatural force
Powerful at greatest distance to unite
With secret amity things of like kind
By secretest conveyance.  Thou my Shade
Inseparable must with me along:
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But least the difficulty of passing back


Stay his return perhaps over this Gulf
Impassable, Impervious, let us try
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this Maine from Hell to that new World
Where Satan now prevails, a Monument
Of merit high to all the infernal Host,
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this new felt attraction and instinct.



Whom thus the meagre Shadow answered soon.

 Go whither Fate and inclination
strong
Leads thee, I shall not lag behind, nor err
The way, thou leading, such a sent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savour of Death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid.



So saying, with delight he snuffed the smell
Of mortal change on Earth.  As when a flock
Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote,
Against the day of Battle, to a Field,
Where Armies lie encamped, come flying, lured
With sent of living Carcasses designed
For death, the following day, in bloody fight.
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned
His Nostril wide into the murkie Air,
Sagacious of his Quarry from so far.
Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste
Wide Anarchy of Chaos damp and dark
Flew divers, and with Power (their Power was great)
Hovering upon the Waters; what they met
Solid or slimy, as in raging Sea

Tossed up and down, together crowded drove
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell.
As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse
Upon the Cronian Sea, together drive
Mountains of Ice, that stop th'imagin'd way
Beyond Petsora Eastward, to the rich

Cathaian Coast. The aggregated Soil
Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry,
As with a Trident smote, and fixed as firm
As Delos floating once; the rest his look
Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move,
And with Asphaltic slime; broad as the 
Gate,
Deep to the Roots of Hell the gathered beach
They fastened, and the Mole immense wrought on
Over the foaming deep high Arched, a Bridge
Of length prodigious joining to the Wall
Immovable of this now fenceless world
Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easy, inoffensive down to Hell.
So, if great things to small may be compared,

Xerxes, the Liberty of Greece to yoke,
From Suss his Memnonian Palace high
Came to the Sea, and over Hellespont

Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined,
And scourged with many a stroke th'indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock
Over the vexed Abyss, following the track
Of Satan, to the self same place where he
First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe
From out of Chaos to the out side bare
Of this round World: with Pins of Adamant
And Chains they made all fast, too fast they made
And durable; and now in little space


The confines met of Empyrean Heaven
And of this World, and on the left hand Hell
With long reach interposed; three several ways
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now their way to Earth they had descried,
To Paradise first tending, when behold

Satan in likeness of an Angel bright
Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion steering
His Zenith, while the Sun in Aries
rose:
Disguised he came, but those his Children dear
Their Parent soon discerned, though in disguise.
He after Eve seduced, unminded slunk
Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By Eve, though all unwitting, seconded
Upon her Husband, saw their shame that sought
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them terrified
He fled, not hoping to escape, but shun
The present, fearing guilty what his wrath
Might suddenly inflict; that past, returned
By Night, and listening where the hapless Pair
Sate in their sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gathered his own doom, which understood
Not instant, but of future time.  With joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned,
And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot
Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop't
Met who to meet him came, his Offspring dear.
Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendous Bridge his joy increased.
Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair
Enchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke.





O Parent, these are thy magnificant deeds,  

Thy Trophies, which thou view as not thine own,
Thou art their Author and prime Architect:
For I no sooner in my Heart divined,
My Heart, which by a secret harmony
Still moves with thine, joined in connexion sweet,
That thou on Earth had prospered, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt
Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt
That I must after thee with this thy Son;
Such fatal consequence unites us three:
Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou has achieved our liberty, confined
Within Hell Gates till, now, thou us impow'rd
To fortify thus far, and overlay
With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss.
Thine now is all this World, thy virtue hath won
What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gained
With odds what War hath lost, and fully avenged
Our foil in Heaven; here thou shalt Monarch reign,
There did not; there let him still Victor sway,
As Battle hath adjudged, from this new World
Retiring, by his own doom alienated,
And henceforth Monarchy with thee divide
Of all things parted by the Empyreal bounds,
His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World,
Or try thee now more dangerous to his Throne.



Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answered glad.

 Fair Daughter, and thou Son and
Grandchild both,
High proof ye now have given to be the Race
Of Satan (for I glory in the name,
Antagonist of Heavens Almighty King)


Amply have merited of me, of all
The infernal Empire, that so near Heavens door
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine with this glorious Work, and made one Realm
Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent
Of easy thorough-fare.  Therefore while I
Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoice,
You two this way, among these numerous Orbs
All yours, right down to Paradise descend;
There dwell and Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth
Dominion exercise and in the Air,
Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declared,
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
My Substitutes I send ye, and Create
Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might
Issuing from me: on your joint vigour now
My hold of this new Kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit.
If your joint power prevails, th'affaires of Hell
No detriment need fear, go and be strong.



So saying he dismissed them, they with speed
Their course through thickest Constellations held
Spreading their bane; the blasted Stars looked wan,
And Planets, Planet-strook, real Eclipse
Then suffered.  The other way Satan went down
The Casey to Hell Gate; on either side
Disported Chaos over built exclaimed,
And with rebounding surge the bars assailed,
That scorned his indignation: through the Gate,
Wide open and unguarded, Satan passed,
And all about found desolate; for those
Appointed to sit there, had left their charge,

Flown to the upper World; the rest were all
Far to the inland retired, about the walls
Of Pand??monium, City and proud seat
Of Lucifer, so by allusion called,
Of that bright Star to Satan paragond.
There kept their Watch the Legions, while the Grand
In Council sate, solicitous what chance
Might intercept their Emperor sent, so he
Departing gave command, and they observed.
As when the Tartar from his Russian Foe
By Astracan over the Snowy Plains
Retires, or Bactrian Sophi from the horns
Of Turkish Crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The Realm of Aladule, in his retreat
To Tauris or Casbeen. So these the late
Heav'n-banisht Host, left desert utmost Hell
Many a dark League, reduced in careful Watch
Round their Metropolis, and now expecting
Each hour their great adventurer from the search
Of Foreign Worlds: he through the midst unmarked,
In show Plebeian Angel militant
Of lowest order, past; and from the door
Of that Plutonian Hall, invisible
Ascended his high Throne, which under state
Of richest texture spread, at th'upper end
Was placed in regal lustre.  Down a while
He sate, and round about him saw unseen:
At last as from a Cloud his fulgent head
And shape Star bright appeared, or brighter, clad
With what permissive glory since his fall
Was left him, or false glitter: All amazed
At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld,
Their mighty Chief returned: loud was th'acclaime:

Forth rushed in haste the great consulting Peers,
Raised from their Dark Divan, and with 
like joy
Congratulant approached him, who with hand
Silence, and with these words attention won.



Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
For in possession such, not only of right,
I call ye and declare ye now, returned
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal Pit
Abominable, accursed, the house of woe,
And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess,
As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven
Little inferior, by my adventure hard
With peril great achieved.  Long were to tell
What I have don, what suffered, with what pain
Voyaged th'unreal, vast, unbounded deep
Of horrible confusion, over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved
To expedite your glorious march; but I
Toiled out my uncouth passage, forced to ride
Th'untractable Abyss, plunged in the womb
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wilde,
That jealous of their secrets fiercely opposed
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar
Protesting Fate supreme; thence how I found
The new created World, which fame in Heaven
Long had foretold, a Fabric wonderful
Of absolute perfection, therein Man
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile
Made happy; Him by fraud I have seduced
From his Creator, and the more to increase
Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat
Offended, worth your laughter, hath given up
Both his beloved Man and all his World,

To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
Without our hazard, labour, or alarm,
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
To rule, as over all he should have ruled.
True is, me also he hath judged, or rather
Me not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape
Man I deceived: that which to me belongs,
Is enmity, which he will put between
Me and Mankind; I am to bruise his heel;
His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
A World who would not purchase with a bruise,
Or much more grievous pain ? Ye have th'account
Of my performance: What remains, ye Gods,
But up and enter now into full bliss.



So having said, a while he stood, expecting
Their universal shout and high applause
To fill his ear, when contrary he hears
On all sides, from innumerable tongues
A dismal universal hiss, the sound
Of public scorn; he wondered, but not long
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more;
His Visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare,
His Arms clung to his Ribs, his Legs entwining
Each other, till supplanted down he fell
A monstrous Serpent on his Belly prone,
Reluctant, but in vain, a greater power
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he sinned,
According to his doom: he would have spoke,
But hiss for hiss returned with forked tongue
To forked tongue, for now were all transformed
Alike, to Serpents all as accessories
To his bold Riot: dreadful was the din
Of hissing through the Hall, thick swarming now
With complicated monsters head and tail,

Scorpion and Asp, and Amphisb??na 
dire,

Cerastes hornd, Hydrus,
and Ellops drier,
And Dipsas (not so thick swarmed once the 
Soil
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the Isle

Ophiusa) but still greatest he the midst,
Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun
Ingenderd in the Pythian Vale on slime,
Huge Python, and his Power no less he seemed
Above the rest still to retain; they all
Him followed issuing forth to th'open Field,
Where all yet left of that revolted Rout
heaven fallen, in station stood or just array,
Sublime with expectation when to see
ln Triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief;
They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd
Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell,
And horrid sympathy; for what they saw,
They felt themselves now changing; down their arms,
Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast,
And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form
Caught by Contagion, like in punishment,
As in their crime.  Thus was th'applause they meant,
Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from their own mouths.  There stood
A Grove hard by, sprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Their penance, laden with Fruit like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve

Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining
For one forbidden Tree a multitude
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame;
Yet parcht with scalding thirst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain,

But on they rolled in heaps, and up the Trees
Climbing, sat thicker then the snaky locks
That curled Meg??ra: greedily they plucked
The fruit fair to sight, like that which grew
Near that bituminous Lake where Sodom flamed;
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceived; they fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with gust, instead of Fruit
Showed bitter Ashes, which th'offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed,
Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd as oft,
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws
With soot and cinders filled; so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumphed once lapsed.  Thus were they plagued
And worn with Famine, long and ceaseless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed,
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo
This annual humbling certain numbered days,
To dash their pride, and joy for Man seduced.
However some tradition they dispersed
Among the Heathen of their purchase got,
And Fabled how the Serpent, whom they called

Ophion with Eurynome, the wide-
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driven
And Ops, ere yet Dictaelig;an Jove was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arrived, Sin there in power before,
Once actual, now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant; behind her Death

Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale Horse: to whom Sin thus began.



Second of Satan sprung, all conquering Death,

What think thou of our Empire now, though earned
With travail difficult, not better far
Then still at Hells dark threshold to have sate watch,
Unnamed, untreated, and thy self half starved?



Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answered soon.

 To me, who with eternal Famine
pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven,
There best, where most with ravine I may meet;
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corps.



To whom th'incestuous Mother thus replied.
 Thou therefore on these Herbs, and
Fruits, and Flours
Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Foul,
No homely morsels, and whatever thing
The Sith of Time mowes down, devour unspar'd,
Till I in Man residing through the Race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.



This said, they both betook them several ways,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later; which the almighty seeing,
From his transcendent Seat the Saints among,
To those bright Orders uttered thus his voice.



See with what heat these Dogs of Hell  advance
To waste and havoc yonder World, which I
So fair and good created, and had still
Kept in that State, had not the folly of Man
Let in these wistful Furies, who impute
Folly to me, so doth the Prince of Hell
And his Adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heavenly, and conniving-seem
To gratify my scornful Enemies,

That laugh, as if transported with some fit
Of Passion, I to them had quited all,
At random yielded up to their misrule;
And know not that I called and drew them thither
My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath shed
On what was pure, till crammed and gorged, nigh burst
With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling
Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son,
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave
at  last
Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jaws.
Then Heaven and Earth renewed shall be made pure
To sanctity that shall receive no stain:
Till then the Curse pronounced on both precedes.



He ended, and the heavenly Audience loud
Sung Halleluia, as the sound of Seas,
Through multitude that sung: 
Just are thy  ways,
Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works;
Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son,
Destined restorer of Mankind, by whom
New Heaven and Earth shall to the Ages rise,
Or down from Heaven descend.  Such
was their song,
While the Creator calling forth by name
His mighty Angels gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things.  The Sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the Earth with cold and heat
Scarce tolerable, and from the North to call
Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring
Solstitial summers heat.  To the blanc Moon
Her office they prescribed, to the other five
Their planetary motions and aspects
In Sextile, Square, 
and Trine, and                                  
                
Opposite,

Of noxious efficacy, and when to join
In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixed
Their influence malignant when to shower,
Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set
Their corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, Air, and Shore, the Thunder when to roll
With terror through the dark Aerial Hall.
Some say he bid his Angels turn askance
The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more
From the Suns Axle; they with labour pushed
Oblique the Centres Globe: Some say the Sun
Was bid turn Reins from th'Equinoctial Rode
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the Seven

Atlantic Sisters, and the Spartan Twins
Up to the Tropic
Crab;  thence
down amain
By Leo and the Virgin and the Scales,
As deep as Capricorn, to bring in change
Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring
Perpetual smiled on Earth with vernant Flours,
Equal in Days and Nights, except to those
Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day
Had unbenighted shone, while the low Sun
To recompense his distance, in their sight
Had rounded still theHorizon, and not  known
Or East or West, which had forbid the Snow
From cold Estotiland, and South as far
Beneath Magellan.  At that tasted Fruit
The Sun, as from Thyestean Banquet, turned
His course intended; else how had the World
Inhabited, though sunless, more then now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat?
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced
Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast,

Vapour, and Mist, and Exhalation hot,
Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore
Bursting their brazen Dungeon, armed with ice
And snow and hail and stormy gust and flaw,

Bores and C??cias and Argestes
loud
And Thrascias rend the Woods and Seas upturn;
With adverse blast upturns them from the South

Notus and Afer black with thundrous Clouds
From Serraliona; thwart of these as fierce
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent Winds

Eurus and Zephir with their lateral noise,

Sirocco, and Libecchio, Thus began
Outrage from lifeless things; but Discord first
Daughter of Sin, among th'irrational,
Death introduced through fierce antipathy:
Beast now with Beast began war, and Foul with Foul,
And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving,
Devoured each other; nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him, or with countenance grim
Glared on him passing: these were from without
The growing miseries, which Adam saw
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within,
And in a troubled Sea of passion tossed,
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint.



O miserable of happy! is this the end
Of this new glorious World, and me so late
The Glory of that Glory, who now become
Accursed of blessed, hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my height
Of happiness: yet well, if here would end
The misery, I deserved it, and would bear
My own deservings; but this will not serve;


All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse.  O voice once heard
Delightfully, 
Increase and  multiply,

 Now death to hear! for what can I
increase
Or multiply, but curses on my head?
Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My Head,  Ill fare our
Ancestor impure,
For this we may thank Adam;

but his thanks
Shall be the execration; so besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me redound,
On me as on their natural center light
Heavy, though in their place.  O fleeting joys
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay
To mould me Man, did I solicit thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious Garden? as my Will
Concurred not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust,
Desirous to resign, and render back
All I received, unable to perform
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not.  To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why has thou added
The sense of endless woes? inexplicable
Thy justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,
I thus contest; then should have been refused
Those terms whatever, when they were proposed:
Thou did accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? and though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son
Prove disobedient, and reproved, retort,

Wherefore did thou beget me? I sought it not:
Would thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,
But Natural necessity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,
Thy punishment then justly is at his Will.
Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair,
That dust I am, and shall to dust return:
O welcome hour whenever! why delays
His hand to execute what his Decree
Fixed on this day? why do I overlive,
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out
To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be Earth
Insensible, how glad would lay me down
As in my Mothers lap? there I should rest
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse
To me and to my offspring would torment me
With cruel expectation.  Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, least all I cannot die,
Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,
Or in some other dismal place who knows
But I shall die a living Death? O thought
Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
Of Life that sinned; what dies but what had life
And sin? the Body properly hath neither.
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt, since humane reach no further knows.
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrath also? be it, man is not so,


But mortal doomed.  How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end?
Can he make deathless Death? that were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held, as Argument
Of weakness, not of Power.  Will he, draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite
In punished man, to satisfy his rigour
Satisfied never; that were to extend
His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law,
By which all Causes else according still
To the reception of their matter act,
Not to th'extent of their own Sphere.  But say
That Death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward, which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me, and so last
To perpetuity; Ay me, that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defenceless head; both Death and I
Am found Eternal, and incorporate both,
Nor I on my part single, in me all
Posterity stands cursed: Fair Patrimony
That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able
To waste it all my self, and leave ye none!
So disinherited how would ye bless
Me now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind
For one mans fault thus guiltless be condemned,
If guiltless? But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt, both Mind and Will depraved,
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me? how can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God? Him after all Disputes
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,

And reasoning, though through Mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;
So might the wrath.  Fond wish! could thou support
That burden heavier then the Earth to bear
Then all the World much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desire
And what thou fear, alike destroys all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future,
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears
And horrors has thou driven me; out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!



Thus Adam to himself lamented loud
Through the still Night, not now, as ere man fell,
Wholesome and cool, and mild, but with black Air
Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom,
Which to his evil Conscience represented
All things with double terror: On the Ground
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground, and oft
Cursed his Creation, Death as oft accused
Of tardy execution, since denounced
The day of his offence.  Why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thrice acceptable stroke
To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hasten to be just?
But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries.
O Woods, O Fountains, Hillocks, Dales and Bowers,
With other echo late I taught your Shades
To answer, and resound far other Song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve bebeld,


Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed:
But her with stern regard he thus repelled.



Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best
Befits thee with him leagued, thy self as false
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour Serpentine may show
Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee
Henceforth; least that too heavenly form, pretended
To hellish falsehood, snare them.  But for thee
I had persisted happy, had not thy pride
And wandering vanity, when lest was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained
Not to be trusted, longing to be seen
Though by the Devil himself, him overweening
To over-reach, but with the Serpent meeting
Fooled and beguiled, by him thou, I by thee,
To trust thee from my side, imagined wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults,
And understood not all was but a show
Rather then solid virtue, all but a Rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister from me drawn,
Well if thrown out, as supernumerary
To my just number found.  O why did God,
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven
With Spirits Masculine, create at last
This novelty on Earth, this fair defect
Of Nature, and not fill the World at once
With Men as Angels without Feminine,
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind? this mischief had not then befallen,
And more that shall befall, innumerable
Disturbances on Earth through Female snares,

And straight conjunction with this Sex: for either
He never shall find out fit Mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake,
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained
By a far worse, or if she love, withheld
By Parents, or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, already linked and Wedlock-bound
To a fell Adversary, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamity shall cause
To Humane life, and household peace confound.



He added not, and from her turned, but Eve

Not so repulsed, with Tears that ceased not flowing,
And tresses all disordered, at his feet
Fell humble, and embracing them, besought
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.



Forsake me not thus, Adam, witness Heaven
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I bear thee, and unwitting have offended,
Unhappily deceived; thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel in this uttermost distress,
My only strength and stay: forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace, both joining,
As joined in injuries, one enmity
Against a Foe by doom express assigned us,
That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this misery befallen,
On me already lost, me then thy self
More miserable; both have sinned, but thou
Against God only, I against God and thee,


And to the place of judgment will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven, that all
The sentence from thy head removed may light
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe,
Me me only just object of his ire.



She ended weeping, and her lowly plight,
Immovable till peace obtained from fault
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought
Commiseration; soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress,
Creature so fair his reconciling seeking,
His counsel whom she had displeased, his aide;
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon.



Unwary, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou know not, who desire
The punishment all on thy self; alas,
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain
His full wrath whose thou feels as yet lest part,
And my displeasure bear so ill.  If Prayers
Could alter high Decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited,
Thy frailty and infirmer Sex forgiven,
To me committed and by me exposed.
But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere, but strive
In offices of Love, how we may lighten
Each others burden in our share of woe;
Since this days Death denounced, if ought I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slow-pac't evil,
A long days dying to augment our pain,
And to our Seed (O hapless Seed!) derived.




To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied.


Adam, by sad experiment I
know
How little weight my words with thee can find,
Found so erroneous, thence by just event
Found so unfortunate; nevertheless,
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain
Thy Love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured
By Death at last, and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our Loins to bring
Into this cursed World a woeful Race,
That after wretched Life must be at last
Food for so foul a Monster, in thy power
It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent
The Race unblessed, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, Childless remain:
So Death shall be deceived his glut, and with us two
Be forced to satisfy his Ravenous Maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From Loves due Rites, Nuptial embraces sweet,
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire, which would be misery
And torment less then none of what we dread,

Then both our selves and Seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short,
Let us seek Death, or he not found, supply
With our own hands his Office on our selves;
Why stand we longer shivering under fears,
That show no end but Death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy.



She ended hear, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts
Had entertained, as died her Cheeks with pale.
But Adam with such counsel nothing swayed,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Labouring had raised, and thus to Eve replied.




Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee something more sublime
And excellent then what thy mind contemns;
But self-destruction therefore sought, refutes
That excellence thought in thee, and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overlov'd.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of misery, so thinking to evade
The penalty pronounced, doubt not but God
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire then so
To be forestalled; much more I fear least Death
So snatched will not exempt us from the pain
We are by doom to pay; rather such acts
Of contumacy will provoke the highest
To make death in us live: Then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to mind with heed
Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise
The Serpents head; piteous amends, unless

Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe

Satan, who in the Serpent hath contrived
Against us this deceit: to crush his head
Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost
By death brought on our selves, or childless days
Resolved, as thou propose; so our Foe
Shall escape his punishment ordained, and wee
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mentioned then of violence
Against our selves, and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope, and savours only
Rancor and pride, impatience and despite,
Reluctance against God and his just yoke
Laid on our Necks.  Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard and judged
Without wrath or reviling; wee expected
Immediate dissolution, which we thought
Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee
Pains only in Child-bearing were foretold,
And bringing forth, soon recompense with joy,
Fruit of thy Womb: On me the Curse aslope
Glanced on the ground, with labour I must earn
My bread; what harm? Idleness had bin worse;
My labour will sustain me; and least Cold
Or Heat should injure us, his timely care
Hath unbesaught provided, and his hands
Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged;
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pity incline,
And teach us further by what means to shun
Th'inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow,
Which now the Sky with various Face begins
To show us in this Mountain, while the Winds
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks

Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek
Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish
Our Limbs benumbed, ere this diurnal Star
Leave cold the Night, how we his gathered beams
Reflected, may with matter sere foment,
Or by collision of two bodies grind
The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds
Jostling or pushed with Winds rude in their shock
Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driven down
Kindles the gummy bark of Fur or Pine,
And sends a comfortable heat from far,
Which might supply the Sun: such Fire to use,
And what may else be remedy or cure
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
He will instruct us praying, and of Grace
Beseeching him, so as we need not fear
To pass commodiously this life, sustained
By him with many comforts, till we end
In dust, our final rest and native home.
What better can we do, then to the place
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent, and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the Air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.
Undoubtedly he will relent and turn
From his displeasure; in whose look serene,
When angry most he seemed and most severe,
What else but favour, grace, and mercy shone?



So spake our Father penitent, nor Eve

Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judged them prostrate fell
Before him reverent, and both confessed

Humbly their faults, and pardon begged, with tears
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the Air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.
The End of the Tenth Book.

