
            Paradise Lost. Book I.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            This first Book proposes, first in brief, the whole Subject, 
Mans disobedience, and the loss thereupon of Paradise wherein  he
was placed: Then touches the prime cause of his fall,  the
Serpent, or rather Satan in the Serpent; who revolting from 
God, and drawing to his side many Legions of Angels, was by the  command
of God driven out of Heaven with all his Crew into the  great Deep.
 Which action past over, the Poem hastes into the  midst of things,
presenting Satan
 with his Angels now  fallen into Hell,
described here, not in the Center  (for Heyven and Earth
may be supposed as yet not made,  certainly not yet accursed) but in
a place of utter darkness,  fittest called Chaos: Here Satan
with his Angels  lying on \the burning Lake, thunder-struck and astonished,
after a certain  space recovers, as from confusion, calls up him who
next in Order  and Dignity lay by him; they confer of their miserable
fall. 
Satan awakens all his Legions, who  lay till then
in the same manner confounded; They rise, their Numbers,  array of
Battle, their chief Leaders named, according to the Idols  known afterwards
in Canaan and the Countries adjoining. To  these Satandirects
his Speech, comforts them with hope yet of  regaining Heaven, but tells
them lastly of a new World and new  kind of Creature to be created,
according to an ancient Prophecy  or report in Heaven; for that
Angels were long before this  visible Creation, was the opinion of many
ancient Fathers.  
To find out the truth of this Prophecy, and what to determine 
thereon he refers to a full Council.  What his Associates thence  attempt.
Pandemonium the Palace of Satan rises, suddenly built
out of the Deep: The infernal Peers there sit in  Council.



OF Mans First Disobedience, and the Fruit
Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal taste
Brought Death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat,
Sing Heavenly Muse, that on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, did inspire
That Shepherd, who first taught the chosen Seed,
In the Beginning how the Heavens and Earth
Rose out of Chaos: Or if Zion Hill
Delight thee more, and Siloa's Brook that flowed
Fast by the Oracle of God; I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventurous Song,


That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above the Aonian Mount, while it pursues
Things undignified yet in Prose or Rhyme.
And chiefly Thou, some copies omit the  commaO
Spirit, that does prefer
Before all Temples the upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for Thou know; Thou from the first
Was present, and with mighty wings outspread
Dove-like sat brooding on the vast Abyss
And made it pregnant: What in me is dark
Illuminates, what is low raise and support;
That to the height of this great Argument
I may assert Eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to men.


Say first, for Heaven hides nothing from thy view
Nor the deep Tract of Hell, say first what cause
Moved our Grand Parents in that happy State,
Favoured of Heaven so highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and transgress his Will
For one restraint, Lords of the World besides?
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt?
The infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile
Stirred up with Envy and Revenge, deceived
The Mother of Mankind, what time his Pride
Had cast him out from Heaven, with all his Host
Of Rebel Angels, by whose aid aspiring
To set himself in Glory above his Peers,
He trusted to have equalled the most High,
If he opposed; and with ambitious aim
Against the Throne and Monarchy of God
Raised impious War in Heaven and Battle proud
With vain attempt.  Him the Almighty Power
Hurled headlong flaming from the Ethereal Sky
With hideous ruin and combustion down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell

In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire,
Who dared defy the Omnipotent to Arms.
Nine times the Space that measures Day and Night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery Gulf
Confounded though immortal: But his doom
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him; round he throws his baleful eyes
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate:
At once as far as Angels ken he views
The dismal Situation waste and wilde,
A Dungeon horrible, on all sides round
As one great Furnace flamed, yet from those flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery Deluge, fed
With ever-burning Sulphur unconsumed:
Such place Eternal Justice had prepared
For those rebellious, here their some copies  print
their  Prison ordained
In utter darkness, and their portion set
As far removed from God and light of Heaven
As from the Center thrice to the utmost Pole.
O how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, overwhelmed
With Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns, and weltering by his side
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in Palestine, and named

Beelzebub.  To whom the Arch-Enemy,


And thence in Heaven called Satan, with bold  words
Breaking the horrid silence thus began.





If thou be he; But O how fallen! how changed
From him, who in the happy Realms of Light
Clothed with transcendent brightness did out-shine
Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
And hazard in the Glorious Enterprise,
Joined with me once, now misery hath joined
In equal ruin: into what Pit thou see
From what height fallen, so much the stronger proved
He with his Thunder: and till then who knew
The force of those dire Arms?  yet not for those,
Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict, do I repent or change,
Though changed in outward lustre; that fixed mind
And high disdain, from sense of injured merit,
That with the mightiest raised me to contend,
And to the fierce contention brought along
Innumerable force of Spirits armed
That dared dislike his reign, and me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power opposed
In dubious Battle on the Plains of Heaven,
And shook his throne.  What though the field be lost?
All is not lost; the unconquerable Will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That Glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me.  To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deify his power,
Who from the terror of this Arm so late
Doubted his Empire, that were low indeed,
That were an ignominy and shame beneath

This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods
And this Imperial substance cannot fail,
Since through experience of this great event
In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanced,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal War
Irreconcilable, to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in the excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heaven.





So spake the Apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but racked with deep despair:
And him thus answered soon his bold Comfier.





O Prince, O Chief of many Droned Powers,
That led the embattled Seraphim to War
Under thy conduct, and in dreadful deeds
Fearless, endangered Heavens perpetual King;
And put to proof his sigh Supremacy,
Whether upheld by strength, or Chance, or Fate,
Too well I see and rue the dire event,
That with sad overthrow and foul defeat
Hath lost us Heaven, and all this mighty Host
In horrible destruction laid thus low,
As far as Gods and Heavenly Essences
Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains
Invincible, and vigour soon returns,
Though all our Glory extinct, and happy state
Here swallowed up in endless misery.
But what if he our Conqueror, (whom I now
Of force believe Almighty, since no less
Then such could have overpowerd such force as ours)
Have left us this our spirit and strength entire
Strongly to suffer and support our pains,
That we may so suffice his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier service as his thralls


By right of War, what ever his business be
Here in the heart of Hell to work in Fire,
Or do his Errands in the gloomy Deep;
What can it then avail though yet we feel
Strength undiminished, or eternal being
To undergo eternal punishment?

 Where to with speedy words the
Arch-fiend replied.





Fallen Cherub, to be weak is miserable
Doing or Suffering: but of this be sure,
To do ought good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being the contrary to his high will
Whom we resist.  If then his Providence
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
Our labour must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil;
Which oft times may succeed, so as perhaps 
Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
His inmost counsels from their destined aim.
But see the angry Victor hath recalled
His Ministers of vengeance and pursuit
Back to the Gates of Heaven: the Sulphurous Hail
Shot after us in storm, overblown hath laid
The fiery Surge, that from the Precipice
Of Heaven received us falling, and the Thunder,
Winged with red Lightning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now
To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
Let us not slip the occasion, whether scorn,
Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe.
See thou yon dreary Plain, forlorn and wilde,
The seat of desolation, void of light,
Save what the glimmering of these livid flames
Casts pale and dreadful?  Thither let us tend

From off the tossing of these fiery waves,
There rest, if any rest can harbour there,
And reassembling our afflicted Powers,
Consult how we may henceforth most offend
Our Enemy, our own loss how repair,
How overcome this dire Calamity,
What reinforcement we may gain from Hope,
If not what resolution from despair.





Thus Satan to his nearest Mate
With Head up-lift above the wave, and Eyes
That sparkling blazed, his other Parts besides
Prone on the Flood, extended long and large
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the Fables name of monstrous size,

Titanian, or Earth-born, that warred on Jove,

Briareos or Typhon, whom the Den
By ancient Tarsus held, or that Sea-beast

Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim the Ocean stream:
Him happily slumbering on the Norway foam
The Pilot of some small night-foundered Skiff,
Deeming some Island, oft, as Sea-men tell,
With fixed Anchor in his scaly rind
Moors by his side under the Lee, while Night
Invests the Sea, and wished Morn delays:
So stretched out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay
Chained on the burning Lake, nor ever thence
Had risen or heaved his head, but that the will
And high permission of all-ruling Heaven
Left him at large to his own dark designs,
That with reiterated crimes he might
Heap on himself damnation, while he sought
Evil to others, and enraged might see
How all his malice served but to bring forth

Infinite goodness, grace and mercy shown
On Man by him seduced, but on himself
Treble confusion, wrath and vengeance poured.
Forthwith upright he rears from off the Pool
His mighty Stature; on each hand the flames
Driven backward slope their pointing spires, and rolled
In billows, leave in the midst a horrid Vale.
Then with expanded wings he steers his flight
Aloft, incumbent on the dusky Air
That felt unusual weight, till on dry Land
He lights, if it were Land that ever burned
With solid, as the Lake with liquid fire;
And such appeared in hue, as when the force
Of subterranean wind transports a Hill
Torn from Pelorus, or the shattered side
Of thundering Aetna, whose combustible
And fuelled entrails thence conceiving Fire,
Sublimed with Mineral fury, aid the Winds,
And leave a singed bottom all involved
With stench and smoke: Such resting found the sole
Of unblessed feet.  Him followed his next Mate,
Both glorying to have escaped the Stygian flood
As Gods, and by their own recovered strength,
Not by the sufferance of supernal Power.





Is this the Region, this the Soil, the Clime,
Said then the lost Arch-Angel, this the seat
That we must change for Heaven, this mournful gloom
For that celestial light?  Be it so, since he
Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid
What shall be right: fardest from him is best
Whom reason hath equalled, force hath made supreme
Above his equals.  Farewell happy Fields
Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrors, hail
Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell

Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings
A mind not to be changed by Place or Time.
The mind is its own place, and in it self
Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.
What matter where, if I be still the same,
And what I should be, all but less then he
Whom Thunder hath made greater? Here at least
We shall be free; the Almighty hath not built
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
Here we may reign secure, and in my choice
To reign is worth ambition though in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heaven.
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,
The associates and copartners of our loss
Lye thus astonished on the oblivious Pool,
And call them not to share with us their part
In this unhappy Mansion, or once more
With rallied Arms to try what may be yet
Regained in Heaven, or what more lost in Hell?





So Satan spake, and him Beelzebub

Thus answered.  Leader of those
Armies bright,
Which but the Omnipotent none could have foiled,
If once they hear that voice, their liveliest pledge
Of hope in fears and dangers, heard so oft
In worst extremes, and on the perilous edge
Of battle when it raged, in all assaults
Their surest signal, they will soon resume
New courage and revive, though now they lye
Grovelling and prostrate on yon Lake of Fire,
As we meanwhile, astounded and amazed,
No wonder, fallen such a pernicious height.





He scarce had ceased when the superior Fiend
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield
Ethereal temper, massy, large and round,

Behind him cast; the broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the Moon, whose Orb
Through Optic Glass the Tuscan Artist views
At Evening from the top of Fesole,
Or in Valdarno, to descry new Lands,
Rivers or Mountains in her spotty Globe.
His Spear, to equal which the tallest Pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the Mast
Of some great Ammiral, were but a wand,
He walked with to support uneasy steps
Over the burning Marle, not like those steps
On Heavens Azure, and the torrid Clime
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with Fire;
Nathless he so endured, till on the Beach
Of that inflamed Sea, he stood and called
His Legions, Angel Forms, who lay entranced
Thick as Autumnal Leaves that strew the Brooks
In Vallombrosa, where the Etrurian shades
High overarched imbowr; or scattered sedge
Afloat, when with fierce Winds Orion armed
Hath vexed the Red-Sea Coast, whose waves overthrew

Busirus and his Memphian Chivalry,
While with perfidious hatred they pursued
The Sojourners of Goshen, who beheld
From the safe shore their floating Carcasses
And broken Chariot Wheels, so thick bestrown
Abject and lost lay these, covering the Flood,
Under amazement of their hideous change.
He called so loud, that all the hollow Deep
Of Hell resounded.  Princes,
Potentates,
Warriors, the Flower of Heaven, once yours, now lost,
If such astonishment as this can seize
Eternal spirits; or have ye chosen this place
After the toil of Battle to repose

Your wearied virtue, for the ease you find
To slumber here, as in the Vales of Heaven?
Or in this abject posture have ye sworn
To adore the Conqueror?  who now beholds
Cherub and Seraph rolling in the Flood
With scattered Arms and Ensigns, till anon
His swift pursuers from Heaven Gates discern
The advantage, and descending tread us down
Thus drooping, or with linked Thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this Gulf.
Awake, arise, or be for ever fallen.





They heard, and were abashed, and up they sprung
Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch
On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread,
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake.
Nor did they not perceive the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel;
Yet to their Generals Voice they soon obeyed
Innumerable.  As when the potent Rod
Of Amrams Son in Egypt evil day
Waved round the Coast, up called a pitchy cloud
Of Locusts, warping on the Eastern Wind,
That ore the Realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like Night, and darkened all the Land of Nile:
So numberless were those bad Angels seen
Hovering on wing under the Cope of Hell
Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding Fires;
Till, as a signal given, the uplifted Spear
Of their great Sultan waving to direct
Their course, in even balance down they light
On the firm brimstone, and fill all the Plain;
A multitude, like which the populous North
Poured never from her frozen loins, to pass

Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous Sons

Came like a Deluge on the South, and spread
Beneath Gibralter to the Lybian sands.
Forthwith from every Squadron and each Band
The Heads and Leaders thither has where stood
Their great Commander; Godlike shapes and forms
Excelling human, Princely Dignities,
And Powers that erst in Heaven sat on Thrones;
Though of their Names in heavenly Records now
Be no memorial blotted out and rased
By their Rebellion, from the Books of Life.
Nor had they yet among the Sons of Eve

Got them new Names, till wandering ore the Earth,
Through Gods high sufferance for the trial of man,
By falsities and lies the greatest part
Of Mankind they corrupted to forsake
God their Creator, and the invisible
Glory of him that made them, to transform
Oft to the Image of a Brute, adorned
With gay Religions full of Pomp and Gold,
And Devils to adore for Deities:
Then were they known to men by various Names,
And various Idols through the Heathen World.
Say, Muse, the Names then known, who first, who last,
Roused from the slumber, on that fiery Couch,
At their great Emperors call, as next in worth
Came singly where he stood on the bare strand,
While the promiscuous crowd stood yet aloof?
The chief were those who from the Pit of Hell
Roaming to seek their prey on earth, dared fix
Their Seats long after next the Seat of God,
Their Altars by his Altar, Gods adored
Among the Nations round, and dared abide

Jehovah thundering out of Zion, throned
Between the Cherubim; yea, often placed

Within his Sanctuary it self their Shrines,
Abominations; and with cursed things
His holy Rites, and solemn Feasts profaned,
And with their darkness dared affront his light.
First Moloch, horrid King besmeared with blood
Of human sacrifice, and parents tears,
Though for the noise of Drums and Timbrels loud
Their children's cries unheard, that past through fire
To his grim Idol.  Him the Ammonite

Worshipped in Rabba and her watery Plain,
In Argob and in Basan, to the stream 
Of utmost Arnon.  Not content with such
Audacious neighbourhood, the wisest heart
Of Solomon he led by fraud to build
His Temple right against the Temple of God
On that opprobrious Hill, and made his Grove
The pleasant Valley of Hinnom, Tophet thence
And black Gehenna called, the Type of Hell.
Next Chemos, the obscene dread of Moabs Sons,
From Aroar to Nebo, and the wild
Of Southernmost Abarim; in Hesebon

And Heronaim, Seons Realm, beyond
The flowery Dale of Sibma clad with Vines,
And Eleale to the Asphaltick Pool.

Peor his other Name, when he enticed

Israel in Sittim on their march from Nile

To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe.
Yet thence his lustful Orgies he enlarged
Even to that Hill of scandal, by the Grove
Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate;
Till good Josiah drove them thence to Hell.
With these came they, who from the bordring flood
Of old Euphrates to the Brook that parts

Egypt from Syrian ground, had general Names

Of Baalim and Ashtaroth, those male,
These Feminine.  For Spirits when they please
Can either Sex assume, or both; so soft
And uncompounded is their Essence pure,
Not tied or manacled with joint or limb,
Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones,
Like cumbrous flesh; but in what shape they choose
Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure,
Can execute their aerie purposes,
And works of love or enmity fulfil.
For those the Race of Israel oft forsook
Their living strength, and unfrequented left
His righteous Altar, bowing lowly down
To bestial Gods; for which their heads as low
Bowed down in Battle, sunk before the Spear
Of despicable foes.  With these in troop
Came Astoreth, whom the Ph??nicians called

Astarte, Queen of Heaven, with crescent Horns;
To whose bright Image nightly by the Moon

Sidonian Virgins paid their Vows and Songs,
In Zion also not unsung, where stood
Her Temple on the offensive Mountain, built
By that uxorious King, whose heart though large,
Beguiled by fair Idolatresses, fell
To Idols foul.  Thammuz came next behind,
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured
The Syrian Damsels to lament his fate
In amorous dittyes all a Summers day,
While smooth Adonis from his native Rock
Ran purple to the Sea, supposed with blood
Of Thammuz yearly wounded: the Love-tale
Infected Sions daughters with like heat,
Whose wanton passions in the sacred Porch

Ezekiel saw, when by the Vision led

His eye surveyed the dark Idolatries
Of alienated Judah.  Next came one
Who mourned in earnest, when the Captive Ark
Maimed his brute Image, head and hands lopped off
In his own Temple, on the grunsel edge,
Where he fell flat, and shamed his Worshippers:

Dagon his Name, Sea Monster, upward Man
And downward Fish: yet had his Temple high
Reared in Azotus, dreaded through the Coast
Of Palestine, in Gath and Ascalon

And Accaron and Gaza's frontier bounds.
Him follow'd Rimmon, whose delightful Seat
Was fair Damascus, on the fertile Banks
Of Abbana and Pharphar, lucid streams.
He also against the house of God was bold:
A Leper once he lost and gained a King,

Ahaz his sottish Conqueror, whom he drew
Gods Altar to disparage and displace
For one of Syrian mode, whereon to burn
His odious offerings, and adore the Gods
Whom he had vanquished.  After these appeared
A crew who under Names of old Renown,

Osiris, Isis, Orus and their
 some copies have their  Train
With monstrous shapes and sorceries abused
Fanatic Egypt and her Priests, to seek
Their wandering Gods disguised in brutish forms
Rather then human.  Nor did Israel escape
The infection when their borrowed Gold composed
The Calf in Oreb: and the Rebel King
Doubled that sin in Bethel and in Dan,
Lik'ning his Maker to the Grazed Ox,

Jehovah, who in one Night when he passed
From Egypt marching, equalled with one stroke
Both her first born and all her bleating Gods. 



Belial came last, then whom a Spirit more lewd
Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love
Vice for it self: To him no Temple stood
Or Altar smoked; yet who more oft then he
In Temples and at Altars, when the Priest
Turns Atheist, as did Ely's Sons, who filled
With lust and violence the house of God.
In Courts and Palaces he also Reigns
And in luxurious Cities, where the noise
Of riot ascends above their  some copies have  theirloftiest Towers,
And injury and outrage: And when Night
Darkens the Streets, then wander forth the Sons
Of Belial, flown with insolence and wine.
Witness the Streets of Sodom, and that night
In Gibeah, when the hospitable door
Exposed a Matron to avoid worse rape.
These were the prime in order and in might;
The rest were long to tell, though far renowned,
The Ionian Gods, of Javans Issue held
Gods, yet confessed later then Heaven and Earth
Their boasted Parents; Titan Heavens first born
With his enormous brood, and birthright seized
By younger Saturn, he from mightier Jove

His own and Rhea's Son like measure found;
So Jove usurping reigned: these first in Create

And Ida known, thence on the Snowy top
Of cold Olympus ruled the middle Air
Their highest Heaven; or on the Delphian Cliff,
Or in Dodona, and through all the bounds
Of Doric Land; or who with Saturn old
Fled over Atria to the Hesperian Fields,
And ore the Celtic roamed the utmost Isles. 
All these and more came flocking; but with looks
Down cast and damp, yet such wherein appeared

Obscure some glimpse of joy, to have found their chief
Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost
In loss itself; which on his countenance cast
Like doubtful hue: but he his wonted pride
Soon recollecting, with high words, that bore
Semblance of worth, not substance, gently raised
Their fencing courage, and dispel'd their fears.
Then strait commands that at the warlike sound
Of Trumpets loud and Clarions be upreard
His mighty Standard; that proud honour claimed

Azazel as his right, a Cherub tall:
Who forthwith from the glittering Staff unfurled
The Imperial Ensign, which full high advanced
Shone like a Meteor streaming to the Wind
With Gems and Golden lustre rich emblazed,
Seraphic arms and Trophies: all the while
Sonorous mettle blowing Martial sounds:
At which the universal Host upsent
A shout that tore Hells Concave, and beyond
Frighted the Reign of Chaos and old Night.
All in a moment through the gloom were seen
Ten thousand Banners rise into the Air
With Orient Colours waving: with them rose
A Forest huge of Spears: and thronging Helms
Appeared, and serried Shields in thick array
Of depth immeasurable: Anon they move
In perfect Phalanx to the Dorian mood
Of Flutes and soft Recorders; such as raised
To height of noblest temper Hero's old
Arming to Battle, and in stead of rage
Deliberate valour breathed, firm and unmoved
With dread of death to flight or foul retreat,
Nor wanting power to mitigate and swag
With solemn touches, troubled thoughts, and chase


Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain
From mortal or immortal minds.  Thus they
Breathing united force with fixed thought
Moved on in silence to soft Pipes that charmed
Their painful steps o'er the burnt soil; and now
Advanced in view, they stand, a horrid Front
Of dreadful length and dazzling Arms, in guise
Of Warriors old with ordered Spear and Shield,
Awaiting what command their mighty Chief
Had to impose: He through the armed Files
Darts his experienced eye, and soon traverse
The whole Battalion views, their order due,
Their visages and stature as of Gods,
Their number last he sums.  And now his heart
Distends with pride, and hardening in his strength
Glories: For never since created man,
Met such embodied force, as named with these
Could merit more then that small infantry
Warred on by Cranes: though all the Giant brood
Of Phlegra with the Heroic Race were joined
That fought at Theb's and Ilium, on each side
Mixed with auxiliary Gods;  and what resounds
In Fable or Romance of Uthers Sons
Begirt with British and Armoric Knights;
And all who since, Baptised or Infidel
Jousted in Aspramont or Montalban,

Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond

Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore
When Charlemain with all his Peerage fell
By Fontarabbia.  Thus far these beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observed
Their dread commander: he above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent
Stood like a Towr; his form had yet not lost

All her Original brightness, nor appeared
Less then Arch Angel ruined, and the excess
Of Glory obscured:  As when the Sun new risen
Looks through the Horizontal misty Air
Shorn of his Beams, or from behind the Moon
In dim Eclipse disastrous twilight sheds
On half the Nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes Monarch. Darkened so, yet shone
Above them all the Arch Angel; but his face
Deep scars of Thunder had entrenched, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under Brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate Pride
Waiting revenge: cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss) condemned
For ever now to have their lot in pain,
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerced
Of Heaven, and from Eternal Splendours flung
For his revolt, yet faithful how they stood,
Their Glory withered.  As when Heavens Fire
Hath scathed the Forest Oaks, or Mountain Pines,
With singed top their stately growth though bare
Stands on the blasted Heath. He now prepared
To speak; whereat their doubled Ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his Peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayed, and thrice in spite of scorn,
Tears such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out their way.





O Myriads of immortal Spirits, O Powers
Matchless, but with the Almighty, and that strife
Was not inglorious, though the event was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change


Hateful to utter: but what power of mind
Foreseeing or presaging, from the Depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared,
How such united force of Gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet believe, though after loss,
That all these puissant Legions, whose exile
Hath emptied Heaven, shall fail to re-ascend
Self-raised, and repossess their native seat?
For me be witness all the Host of Heaven,
If counsels different, or danger shunned
By me  some copies have me ,  have lost our
hopes.  But he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven, till then as one secure
Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custom, and his Regal State
Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed,
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New war, provoked; our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile
What force effected not: that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force, hath overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation, whom his choice regard
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven:
Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere:
For this Infernal Pit shall never hold
C??lestial Spirits in Bondage, nor the Abyss
Long under darkness cover.  But these thoughts

Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaired,
For who can think Submission? War then, War
Open or understood must be resolved.





He spake: and to confirm his words, out-flew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze
Far round illumined hell: highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped Arms
Clashed on their sounding Shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the Vault of Heaven.


There stood a Hill not far whose grisly top
Belched fire and rolling smoke; the rest entire
Shone with a glossy scurff, undoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic Ore,
The work of Sulphur.  Thither winged with speed
A numerous Brigad hastened.  As when Bands
Of Pioners with Spade and Pickax armed
Forerun the Royal Camp, to trench a Field,
Or cast a Rampart.  Mammon led them on,

Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From heaven, for even in heaven his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of Heavens pavement, trodden Gold,
Then aught divine or holy else enjoyed
In vision beatific: by him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransacked the Center, and with impious hands
Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth
For Treasures better hid.  Soon had his crew
Opened into the Hill a spacious wound
And dug out ribs of Gold.  Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell; that soil may best
Deserve the precious bane.  And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell


Of Babel, and the works of Memphian Kings
Learn how their greatest Monuments of Fame,
And Strength and Art are easily out-done
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they with incessant toil
And hands innumerable scarce perform.
Nigh on the Plain in many cells prepared,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluiced from the Lake, a second multitude
With wondrous Art found out the massy Ore,
Severing each kind, and scummed the Bullion dross:
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook,
As in an Organ from one blast of wind
To many a row of Pipes the sound-board breaths.Fletcher

Anon out of the earth a Fabric huge
Rose like an Exhalation, with the sound
Of Dulcet Symphonies and voices sweet,
Built like a Temple, where Pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With Golden Architrave; nor did there want
Cornice or Freeze, with bossy Sculptures graven,
The Roof was fretted Gold.  Not Babilon,
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equalled in all their glories, to enshrine

Belus or Serapis their Gods, or seat
Their Kings, when ??gypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. The ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately height, and strait the doors
Opening their brazen folds discover wide
Within, her ample spaces, o'er the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof
Pendant by subtle Magic many a row

Of Starry Lamps and blazing Cressets fed
With Naphtha and Asphaltus yielded 
light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered, and the work some praise
And some the Architect: his hand was known
In Heaven by many a Towered structure high,
Where Sceptred Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King                  
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright.
Nor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber; and how he fell
From Heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove

Sheer o'er the Crystal Battlements; from Morn
To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve,
A Summers day; and with the setting Sun
Dropped from the Zenith like a falling Star,
On Lemnos the ??g??an Isle: thus they
relate,
Erring; for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before; nor aught availed him now
To have built in Heaven high Towers; nor did he escape
By all his Engines, but was headlong sent
With his industrious crew to build in hell.
Mean while the winged Heralds by command
Of soverign power, with awful Ceremony
And Trumpets sound throughout the Host proclaim
A solemn Council forthwith to be held
At Pand??monium, the high Capital
Of Satan and his Peers: their summons called
From every Band and squared Regiment
By place or choice the worthiest; they anon
With hundreds and with thousands trooping came
Attended: all access was thronged, the Gates

And Porches wide, but chief the spacious Hall
(Though like a covered field, where Champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldans chair
Defied the best of Panim chivalry
To mortal combat or career with Lance)
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brushed with the hiss of rustling wings.  As Bees
In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides,
Pour forth their populous youth about the Hive
In clusters;  they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank,
The suburb of their Straw-built Citadel,
New rubbed with Baum, expatiate and confer
Their State affairs. So thick the aerie crowd
Swarmed and were straightened; till the Signal given,
Behold a wonder! they but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons
Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless, like that Pigmean Race         
Beyond the Indian Mount, or Fairy Elves,
Whose midnight Revels, by a Forest side
Or Fountain some belated Peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while over-head the Moon
Sits Arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course, they on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund Music charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still amidst the Hall
Of that infernal Court. But far within
And in their own dimensions like themselves
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim

In close recess and secret conclave sat
A thousand demigods on golden seat's,
Frequent and full.  After short silence then
And summons read, the great consult began.
The End of the First Book.

