
            Paradise Lost. Book II.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            The Consultation begun, Satan debates whether anothere
Battle be to be hazarded for the recovery of Heyven: some  advise
it, others dissuade:  A third proposal is preferred,  mentioned
before by Satan to search the truth of that Prophecy  or
Tradition in Heaven concerning another world, and another kind  of creature
equal or not much inferior to themselves, about  this time to be
created:  Their doubt who shall be sent on this  difficult search: Satan
their chief undertakes alone the  voyage, is honoured and applauded.
 The Council thus ended,  the rest betake them several ways and to
several employments, as  their inclinations lead them, to entertain the
time till 
Satan return.  He passes on his Journey to Hell Gates, 
finds them shut, and who sat there to guard them, by whom at  length
they are opened, and discover to him the great Gulf between  Hell and
Heaven;  with what difficulty he passes through,  directed by Chaos,
the Power of that place, to the sight of  this new World which he
sought.



HIgh on a Throne of Royal State, which far
Outshone the wealth of Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showers on her Kings Barbaric Pearl and Gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence; and from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain War with Heaven, and by success untaught
His proud imaginations thus displayed.



Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven,
For since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigour, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost.  From this descent
Celestial virtues rising, will appear
More glorious and more dread then from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate:
Me though just right, and the fixed Laws of Heaven
Did first create your Leader, next free choice,
With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight,
Hath bin achieved of merit, yet this loss
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more
Established in a safe unenvied Throne
Yielded with full consent.  The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
Foremost to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? where there is then no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From Faction; for none sure will claim in Hell 

Precedence, none, whose portion is so small
Of present pain, that with ambitious mind
Will covet more.  With this advantage then
To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,
More then can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper then prosperity
Could have assured us; and by what best way,
Whether of open War or covert guile,
We now debate; who can advise, may speak.



He ceased, and next him Moloc, Sceptred King
Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven; now fiercer by despair:
His trust was with the Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather then be less
Cared not to be at all; with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse
He reckoned not, and these words thereafter spake.



My sentence is for open War: Of Wiles,
More inexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need, not now.
For while they sit contriving, shall the rest,
Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait
The Signal to ascend, sit lingering here
Heavens fugitives, and for their dwelling place
Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame,
The Prison of his Tyranny who Reigns
By our delay? no, let us rather choose
Armed with Hell flames and fury all at once
O'er Heavens high Towers to force resistless way,
Turning our Tortures into horrid Arms
Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise
Of his Almighty Engine he shall hear
Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning see 

Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels; and his Throne it self
Mixed with Tartarean Sulphur, and strange fire,
His own invented Torments.  But perhaps
The way seems difficult and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe.
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful Lake benumm not still,
That in our proper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat: descent and fall
To us is adverse.  Who but felt of late
When the fierce Foe hung on our broken Rear
Insulting, and pursued us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? The ascent is easy then;
The event is feared; should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction: if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroyed: what can be worse
Then to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
In this abhorred deep to utter woe;
Where pain of inextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour
Calls us to Penance? More destroyed then thus
We should be quite abolished and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which to the height enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essential, happier far
Then miserable to have eternal being:
Or if our substance be indeed Divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst 

On this side nothing; and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inroads to Alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne:
Which if not Victory is yet Revenge.



He ended frowning, and his look denounced
Desperate revenge, and Battle dangerous
To less then Gods.  On the other side up rose

Belial, in act more graceful and humane;
A fairer person lost not Heaven; he seemed
For dignity composed and high exploit:
But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue
Dropped Manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low;
To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful: yet he pleased the ear,
And with persuasive accent thus began.



I should be much for open War, O Peers,
As not behind in hate; if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate War,
Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success:
When he who most excels in fact of Arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what Revenge? the Towers of Heaven are filled
With Armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep
Encamp their Legions, or with obscure wing
Scout far and wide into the Realm of night,
Scorning surprise.  Or could we break our way 

By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest Insurrection, to confound
Heavens purest Light, yet our great Enemy
All incorruptible would on his Throne
Sit unpolluted, and the Ethereal mould
Incapable of stain would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire
Victorious.  Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
The Almighty Victor to spend all his rage,
And that must end us, that must be our cure,
To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? how he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence, or unaware,
To give his Enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger, whom his anger saves
To punish endless? wherefore cease we then?
Say they who counsel War, we are decreed,
Reserved and destined to Eternal woe;
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? is this then worst,
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heavens afflicting Thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay 


Chained on the burning Lake? that sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires
Awaked should blow them into sevenfold rage
And plunge us in the flames? or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? what if all
Her stores were opened, and this Firmament
Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire,
Impending horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery Tempest shall be hurled
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey
Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling Ocean, wrapped in Chains;
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd,
Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse.
War therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice dissuades; for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? he from heavens height
The final h was inked in in some copies of the 1674
edition, apparently at the Simmons' press.

All these our motions vain, sees and derides;
Not more Almighty to resist our might
Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we then live thus vile, the Race  some 
copies have race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled to suffer here
Chains and these Torments? better these then worse
By my advice; since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,
The Victors will.  To suffer, as to doe,
Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust
That so ordains: this was at first resolved,
If we were wise, against so great a foe 

Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold
And venturous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
What yet they know must follow, to endure
Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their Conqueror: This is now
Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps thus far removed
Not mind us not offending, satisfied
With what is punished; whence these raging fires
Will slacken, if his breath stir not their flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour, or inured not feel,
Or changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light,
Besides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waiting, since our present lot appears
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to our selves more woe.



Thus Belial with words clothed in reasons  garb
Counselled ignoble ease, and peaceful sloth,
Not peace: and after him thus Mammon spake.



Either to disinthrone the King of Heaven
We war, if war be best, or to regain
Our own right lost : him to unthrone we then
May hope when everlasting Faith shall yield
To fickle Chance and Chaos judge the strife:
The former vain to hope argues as vain
The latter: for what place can be for us
Within Heavens bound, unless Heavens Lord supreme 


We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish Grace to all, on promise made
Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict Laws imposed, to celebrate his Throne
With warbled Hymns, and to his Godhead sing
Forced Halleluiahs; while he Lordly sits
Our envied Soverign, and his Altar breathes
Ambrosial Odours and Ambrosial Flowers,
Our servile offerings.  This must be our task
In Heaven this our delight; how wearisome
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate.  Let us not then pursue
By force impossible, by leave obtained
Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek
Our own good from our selves, and from our own
Live to our selves, though in this vast recess,
Free, and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke
Of servile Pomp.  Our greatness will appear
Then most conspicuous, when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse
We can create, and in what place so ever
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labour and endurance.  This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How oft amidst
Thick clouds and dark doth Heavens all-ruling Sire
Choose to reside, his Glory unobscured,
And with the Majesty of darkness round
Covers his Throne;  from whence deep thunders roar
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell?
As he our darkness, cannot we his Light
Imitate when we please? This Desert soil 

Wants not her hidden lustre, Gems and Gold;
Nor want we skill or Artsome copies have  art,
from whence to raise
Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more?
Our torments also may in length of time
Become our Elements, these piercing Fires
As soft as now severe, our temper changed
Into their temper; which must needs remove
The sensible of pain.  All things invite
To peaceful Counsels, and the settled State
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and were, dismissing quite
All thoughts of war: ye have what I advise.



He scarce had finished, when such murmur filled
The Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long
Had roused the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Sea-faring men overwatched, whose Bark by chance
Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay
After the Tempest:  Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his Sentence pleased,
Advising peace: for such another Field
They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear
Of Thunder and the Sword of Michael

Wrought still within them; and no less desire
To found this nether Empire, which might rise
By policy, and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heaven.
Which when Beelzebub perceived, then whom,

Satan except, none higher sat, with grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed
A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven
Deliberation sat and public care;
And Princely counsel in his face yet shone, 


Majestic though in ruin: sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear
The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention still as Night
Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he spake.



Thrones and Imperial Powers, off-spring of  heaven
Ethereal Virtues; or these Titles now
Must we renounce, and changing stile be called
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclines, here to continue, and build up here
A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heaven hath doomed
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt
From Heavens high jurisdiction, in new League
Banded against his Throne, but to remain
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed,
Under the inevitable curb, reserved
His captive multitude: For he, be sure
In height or depth, still first and last will Reign
Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His Empire, and with Iron Sceptre rule
Us here, as with his Golden those in Heaven.
What sit we then projecting peace and War?
War hath determined us, and foiled with loss
Irreparable; terms of peace yet none
Vouchsafed or sought; for what peace will be given
To us enslaved, but custody severe,
And stripes, and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But to our power hostility and hate,
Untamed reluctance, and revenge though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least 

May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege,
Or ambush from the Deep.  What if we find
Some easier enterprise? There is a place
(if ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven
Err not) another World, the happy seat
Of some new Race called Man, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favoured more
Of him who rules above; so was his will
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an Oath,
That shook Heavens whole circumference, confirmed.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould,
Or substance, how endued, and what their Power,
And where their weakness, how attempted best,
By force or subtlety: Though Heaven be shut,
And Heavens high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lye exposed
The utmost border of his Kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here perhaps
Some advantageous act may be achieved
By sudden onset, either with Hell fire
To waste his whole Creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive as we were driven,
The puny habitants, or if not drive,
Seduce them to our Party, that their God
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works.  This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our Confusion, and our joy upraise 


In his disturbance; when his darling Sons
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Their frail Original, and faded bliss,
Faded so soon.  Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain Empires.  Thus Beelzebub

Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devised
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence,
But from the Author of all ill could Spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creator? But their spite still serves
His glory to augment.  The bold design
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkled in all their eyes; with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews.



Well have ye judged, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are,
Great things resolved; which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spite of Fate,
Nearer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms
And opportune excursion we may chance
Re-enter Heaven; or else in some mild Zone
Dwell not unvisited of Heavens fair Light
Secure, and at the brightening Orient beam
Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air,
To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires
Shall breathe her balm.  But first whom shall we send
In search of this new world, whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet
The dark unbottomed infinite Abyss
And through the palpable obscure find out 

His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight
Up-born with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Isle; what strength, what art can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe
Through the strict Sentries and Stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection, and wee now no less
Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send,
The weight of all and our last hope relies.



This said, he sat; and expectation held
His look suspense, awaiting who appeared
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt: but all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In others countenance read his own dismay
Astonished: none among the choice and prime
Of those Heaven-warring Champions could be found
So hardy as to proffer or accept
Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last

Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised
Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake.



O Progeny of Heaven, Imperial Thrones,
With reason hath deep silence and demure
Seized us, though undismayed: long is the way
And hard, that out of Hell leads up to light;
Our prison strong, this huge convex of Fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant
Barred over us prohibit all egress.
These past, if any pass, the void profound
Of inessential Night receives him next
Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being 

Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
If thence he escape into whatever world,
Or unknown Region, what remains him less
Then unknown dangers and as hard escape.
But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers,
And this Imperial Sovereignty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment, in the shape
Of difficulty or danger could deter
Me  some copies have me  from  attempting. 
Wherefore do I assume
These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who Reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more, as he above the rest
High honoured sits? Go therefore mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen; intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable; if there be cure or charm
To respite or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad
Through all the Coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all: this enterprise
None shall partake with me.   Thus
saying rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply,
Prudent, least from his resolution raised
Others among the chief might offer now
(Certain to be refused) what erst they feared;
And so refused might in opinion stand
His Rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn.  But they
Dreaded not more the adventure then his voice

Forbidding; and at once with him they rose;
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of Thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone; and as a God
Extol him equal to the highest in Heaven:
Nor failed they to express how much they praised,
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Loose all her virtue; least bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or close ambition varnished o'er with zeal.
Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, overspread
Heavens cheerful face, the lowering Element
Scowls ore the darkened landscape Snow, or shower;
If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with Devil damned
Firm concord holds, men only disagree
Of Creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars,
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish foes enough besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait.


The Stygian Counsel thus dissolved; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers,
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemed 

Alone the Antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hells dread Emperor with pomp Supreme,
And God-like imitated State; him round
A Globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms.
Then of their Session ended they bid cry
With Trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding Alchemy
By Heralds voice explained: the hollow Abyss
Heard far and wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafening shout, returned them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease their minds and somewhat raised
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers
Disband, and wandering, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksome hours, till this great Chief return.
Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime
Upon the wing, or in swift Race contend,
As at theOlympian Games or Pythian fields;
Part curb their fiery Steeds, or shun the Goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form.
As when to warn proud Cities war appears
Waged in the troubled Sky, and Armies rush
To Battle in the Clouds, before each Van
Prick forth the Aerie Knights, and couch their Spears
Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms
From either end of Heaven the welkin burns.
Others with vast Typh??an rage more fell
Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air
In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wilde uproar.
As when Alcides from Oechalia Crowned 

With conquest, felt the envenomed robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian Pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into theEuboic Sea.  Others more mild,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes Angelical to many a Harp
Their own Heroic deeds and hapless fall
By doom of Battle; and complain that Fate
Free Virtue should enthral to Force or Chance.
Their Song was partial, but the harmony
(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?)
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience.  In discourse more sweet
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense,)
Others apart sat on a Hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate,
Fixed Fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and Apathy, and glory and shame,
Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophy:
Yet with a pleasing sorcery could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm the obdured breast
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part in Squadrons and gross Bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways their flying March, along the Banks
Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge
Into the burning Lake their baleful streams; 

Abhorred Styx the flood of deadly hate,
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep;

Cocytus, named of lamentation loud
Heard on the rueful stream; fierce Phlegeton

Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage.
Far off from these a slow and silent stream,

Lethe the River of Oblivion roules
Her watery Labyrinth, whereof who drinks,
Forthwith his former state and being forgets,
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen Continent
Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual storms
Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that Serbonian Bog
Betwixt Damiata and mount Casius old,
Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air
Burns frore, and cold performs the effect of Fire.
Thither by harpy-footed Furies hailed,
At certain revolutions all the damned
Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From Beds of raging Fire to starve in Ice
Their soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixt, and frozen round,
Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean Sound
Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so near the brink;
But Fate  some copies have fate           withstands, and to oppose the attempt 


Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The Ford, and of it self the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus.  Thus roving on
In confused march forlorn, the adventrous Bands
With shuddering horror pale, and eyes aghast
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found
No rest: through many a dark and dreary Veil
They passed, and many a Region dolorous,
O'er many a Frozen, many a fiery Alpe,
Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of death,
A Universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good,
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Abominable, unutterable, and worse
Than Fables yet have feigned, or fear conceived,

Gorgons and Hydra's, and 
Chimera's dire.


Mean while the Adversary of God and Man,

Satan with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and towards the Gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight; some times
He scours the right hand coast, some times the left,
Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soars
Up to the fiery Concave touring high.
As when far off at Sea a Fleet descried
Hangs in the Clouds, by ??quinoctial Winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the Isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence Merchants bring
Their spicie Drugs: they on the Trading Flood
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape
Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole.  So seemed
Far off the flying Fiend: at last appear
Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof, 

And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass,
Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsumed.  Before the Gates there sat
On either side a formidable shape;
The one seemed Woman to the waste, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fouled
Voluminous and vast, a Serpent armed
With mortal sting: about her middle round
A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing barked
With wide Cerberian mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb,
And kennel there, yet there still barked and howled,
Within unseen.  Far less abhorred than these
Vexed Scylla bathing in the Sea that parts

Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore:
Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when called
In secret, riding through the Air she comes
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland Witches, while the labouring Moon
Eclipses at their charms.  The other shape,
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb,
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed either; black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful Dart; what seemed his head
The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on.

Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The Monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode.
The undaunted Fiend what this might be admired, Admired, not feared;
God and his Son except, 

Created thing nought valued he nor shunned;
And with disdainful look thus first began.



Whence and what art thou, execrable shape,
That dare, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated Front athwart my way
To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee:
Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven.



To whom the Goblin full of wrath replied,

Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and Faith, till then
Unbroken, and in proud rebellious Arms
Drew after him the third part of Heavens Sons
Conjured against the highest, for which both Thou
And they outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste Eternal days  some copies have days  in woe and pain?
And reckons thou thy self with Spirits of Heaven,
Hell-doomed, and breath defiance here and scorn
Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more,
Thy King and Lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings,
Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this Dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before.



So spake the grisly terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold
More dreadful and deform: on the other side
Incensed  some copies have Licenced with indignation Satan stood
Unterrifi'd, and like a Comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiucus huge
In the Arctic Sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes Pestilence and War. Each at the Head
Leveled his deadly aim; their fatal hands 


No second stroke intend, and such a frown
Each cast at the other, as when two black Clouds
With Heavens Artillery fraught, come rattling on
Over the Caspian, then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till Winds the signal blow
To join their dark Encounter in mid air:
So frowned the mighty Combatants, that Hell
Grew darker at their frown, so matched they stood;
For never but once more was either like
To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds
Had been achieved, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the Snaky Sorceress that sat
Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between.



O Father, what intends thy hand, 
she  cried,

Against thy only Son? What fury O Son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart
Against thy Fathers head? and know for whom;
For him who sits above and laughs the while
At thee ordained his drudge, to execute
What ever his wrath, which he calls justice, bids,
His wrath which one day will destroy ye both.



She spake, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore, then these to her Satan returned:



So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposes, that my sudden hand
Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends; till first I know of thee,
What thing thou art, thus double-formed, and why
In this infernal Veil first met thou call
Me Father, and that Phantasm call my Son?
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable then him and thee. 




They whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate replied;

has thou forgot me then, and do I seem
Now in thine eyes so foul, once deemed so fair
In Heaven, when at The Assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heavens King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzy swum
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a Goddess armed
Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seized
All the Host of Heaven; back they recoiled afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a Sign
Portentous held me; but familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most averse, thee chiefly, who full oft
Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing
Became enamoured, and such joy thou took
With me in secret, that my womb conceived
A growing burden.  Mean while War arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven; wherein remained
(For what could else) to our Almighty Foe
Clear Victory, to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean: down they fell
Driven headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep, and in the general fall
I also; at which time this powerful Key
Into my hand was given, with charge to keep
These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening.  Pensive here I sat
Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb 


Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou see
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way
Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal Dart
Made to destroy: I fled, and cried out Death;
Hell trembled at the hideous Name, and sighed
From all her Caves, and back resounded Death.
I fled, but he pursued (though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust then rage) and swifter far,
Me overtook his mother all dismayed,
And in embraces forcible and foul
Engendering with me, of that rape begot
These yelling Monsters that with ceaseless cry
Surround me, as thou saw, hourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me, for when they list into the womb
That bred them they return, and howl and gnaw
My Bowels, their repast; then bursting forth
A fresh with conscious terrors vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death my Son and foe, who sets them on,
And me his Parent would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involved; and knows that I
Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane,
When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounced.
But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright Arms,

Though tempered heavenly, for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist.



She finished, and the subtle Fiend his lore
Soon learned, now milder, and thus answered smooth.

Dear Daughter, since thou clammiest me for thy Sire,
And my fair Son here shows me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befallen us unforeseen, unthought of, know
I come no enemy, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain,
Both him and thee, and all the heavenly Host
Of Spirits that in our just pretences armed
Fell with us from on high: from them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
My self expose, with lonely steps to tread
The unfounded deep, and through the void immense
To search with wandering quest a place foretold
Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and round, a place of bliss
In the Purlieus of Heaven, and therein placed
A race of upstart Creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
Least Heaven surcharged with potent multitude
Might hap to move new broils: Be this or aught
Then this more secret now designed, I haste
To know, and this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
Wing silently the buxom Air, embalmed
With odours; there ye shall be fed and filled
Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey.

He ceased, for both seemed highly pleased, and Death
Grinnd horrible a ghastly smile, to hear 


His famine should be filled, and blessed his maw
Destined to that good hour: no less rejoiced
His mother bad, and thus bespoke her Sire.



The key of this infernal Pit by due,
And by command of Heavens all-powerful King
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These Adamantine Gates; against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be overmatched by living might.
But what ow I to his commands above
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful Office here confined,
Inhabitant of Heaven, and heavenly-born,
Here in perpetual agony and pain,
With terrors and with clamours compassed round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed:
Thou art my Father, thou my Author, thou
My being gave me; whom should I obey
But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end.



Thus saying, from her side the fatal Key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took;
And towards the Gate rolling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge Porcullis high up drew,
Which but her self not all the Stygian powers
Could once have moved; then in the key-hole turns
Thunderstorm wards, and every Bolt and Bar
Of massy Iron or solid Rock with ease
Unfastens: on a sudden open fly
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound 

The infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh Thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
Of Erebus.  She opened, but to shut
Excelled her power; the Gates wide open stood,
That with extended wings a Bannered Host
Under spread Ensigns marching might pass through
With Horse and Chariots ranked in loose array;
So wide they stood, and like a Furnace mouth
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame.
Before their eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoary deep, a dark
Illimitable Ocean without bound,
Without dimension, where length, breadth, & height,
And time and place are lost; where eldest Night
And Chaos.  Ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal Anarchy, amidst the noise
Of endless Wars, and by confusion stand.
For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four Champions fierce
Strive here for Maistrie, and to Battle bring
Their embryon Atoms; they around the flag
Of each his Faction, in their several Clanns,
Light-armed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the Sands
Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring Winds, and poise
Their lighter wings.  To whom these most adhere,
He rules a moment; Chaos Umpire sits,
And by decision more embroils the fray
By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter

Chance governs all.  Into this wilde Abyss,
The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave,
Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire,
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight, 


Unless the almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more Worlds,
Into this wild Abyss the wary fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while,
Pondering his Voyage; for no narrow frith
He had to cross.  Nor was his ear less pealed
With noises loud and ruinous (to compare
Great things with small) then when Bellona storms,
With all her battering Engines bent to raise
Some Capital City; or less then if this frame
Of Heaven were falling, and these Elements
In mutiny had from her Axle torn
The steadfast Earth. At last his Sail-broad Vannes
He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoke
Uplifted spurns the ground, thence many a League
As in a cloudy Chair ascending rides
Audacious, but that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuity: all unawares
Fluttering his pennons vain plumb down he drops
Ten thousand fathom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not by ill chance
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud
Instinct with Fire and Nitre hurried him
As many miles aloft: that fury stayed,
Quenched in a Boggy Syrtis, neither Sea,
Nor good dry Land: nigh foundered on he fares,
Treading the crude consistency, half on foot,
Half flying; behoves him now both Oar and Sail.
As when a Griffin through the Wilderness
With winged course ore Hill or moarie Dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
Had from his wakeful custody purloined
The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend
Ore bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,

With head, hands, wings or feet pursues his way,
And swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies:
At length a universal hubbub wilde
Of stunning sounds and voices all confused
Born through the hollow dark assaults his ear
With loudest vehemence: thither he plies,
Undaunted to meet there what ever power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies
Bordering on light; when strait behold the Throne
Of Chaos, and his dark Pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep; with him Enthroned
Sat Sable-vested Night, eldest of things,
The Consort of his Reign; and by them stood

Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name
Of Demogorgon; Rumour next and Chance,
And Tumult and Confusion all embroiled,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.


They whom Satan turning boldly, thus.
 Ye Powers
And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss,

Chaos and ancient Night, I come no Spy,
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint
Wandering this darksome Desert, as my way,
Lies through your spacious Empire up to light,
Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek
What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds
Confine with Heaven; or if some other place
From your Dominion won, the Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound, direct my course;
Directed no mean recompense it brings
To your behoof, if I that Region lost, 

All usurpation thence expelled, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway
(Which is my present journey) and once more
Erect the Standard there of ancient Night;
Yours be the advantage all, mine the revenge.



Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old
With faltering speech and visage incompos'd
Answered.  I know thee, stranger,
who thou art,
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head against Heavens King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard, for such a numerous Host
Fled not in silence through the frighted deep
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded; and Heaven Gates
Poured out by millions her victorious Bands
Pursuing.  I upon my Frontiers here
Keep residence; if all I can will serve,
That little which is left so to defend,
Encroached on still through our intestine broils
Weakening the Sceptre of old Night: first Hell
Your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath;
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another World
Hung ore my Realm, linked in a golden Chain
To that side Heaven from whence your Legions fell:
If that way be your walk, you have not far;
So much the nearer danger; go and speed;
Havoc and spoil and ruin are my gain.



He ceased; and Satan staid not to reply,
But glad that now his Sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacrity and force renewed
Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire
Into the wilde expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting Elements, on all sides round
Environed wins his way; harder beset 

And more endangered, then when Argo passed
Through Bosporus betwixt the jostling Rocks:
Or when Ulysses on the Larbord shunned

Charybdis, and by the other whirlpool steered.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Moved on, with difficulty and labour he;
But he once past, soon after when man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain
Following his track, such was the will of Heaven,
Paved after him a broad and beaten way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling Gulf
Tamely endured a Bridge of wondrous length
From Hell continued reaching th'utmost Orb
Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse
With easy intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn; here Nature first begins
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire
As from her outmost works a brok'd foe
With tumult less and with less hostile din,
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light
And like a weather-beaten Vessel holds
Gladly the Port, though Shrouds and Tackle torn;
Or in the emptier waste, resembling Air,
Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold
Far off the Empyreal Heaven, extended wide
In circuit, undetermined square or round,
With Opal Towers and Battlements adorned
Of living Sapphire, once his native Seat; 

And fast by hanging in a golden Chain
This pendant world, in bigness as a Star
Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon.
Thither full fraught with mischievous revenge,
Accursed, and in a cursed hour he hies.
The End of the Second Book.

