
            Paradise Lost. Book IV.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            
Satan now in prospect of Eden,  and nigh the
place where he  must now attempt the bold enterprise which he undertook
 alone against God and Man, falls into many doubts with himself,  and
many passions, fear, envy, and despair;  but at length  confirms himself
in evil, journeys on to Paradise,  whose outward prospect
and situation is described, overleaps the  bounds, sits in the shape of
a Cormorant on the Tree of life, as  highest in the Garden to look
about him.  The Garden  decribbed; Satan's first sight of
Adam and Eve; his  wonder at their excellent form and
happy state, but with  resolution to work their fall; overhears their discourse,
 thence gathers that the Tree of knowledge was forbidden them to  eat
of, under penalty of death; and thereon intends to found his 
Temptation, by seducing them to transgress: then leaves them  a
while, to know further of their state by some other means.   Meanwhile
Uriel descending on a Sun-beam warns Gabriel, who 
had in charge the Gate of Paradise, 

 that some evil spirit had escaped the
Deep, and  past at Noon by his Sphere in the shape of a good Angel
down  to Paradise, discovered after by his furious 
gestures in the Mount. Gabriel promises to find him ere 
morning.  Night coming on, Adam and Eve, discourse
of going  to their rest: their Bower described; their Evening worship. 
Gabriel drawing forth his Bands of Night-watch to walk the 
round of Paradise, appoints two strong Angels to 
Adams Bower, least the evil spirit should be there doing some
 harm to Adam or Eve sleeping; there they find him
at the ear  of Eve,tempting her in a dream, and bring him,
though  unwilling, to Gabriel;  by whom questioned, he
scornfully  answers, prepares resistance, but hindered by a Sign from
Heaven,  flies out of Paradise.


O For that warning voice, which he who saw
TheApocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be revenged on men,


 Wo to the
inhabitants on  Earth!
 that now,
While time was, our first-Parents had bin warned
The coming of their secret foe, and escaped
Happily so escaped his mortal snare; for now

Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down,
The Tempter ere the Accuser of man-kind,
To wreck on innocent frail man his loss
Of that first Battle, and his flight to Hell:
Yet not rejoicing in his speed, though bold,
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth
Now rolling, boils in his tumultuous breast,
And like a devilish Engine back recoils
Upon himself; horror and doubt distract 

His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom stir
The Hell within him, for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step no more then from himself can fly
By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair
That slumberd, wakes the bitter memory
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes towards Eden which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grieved look he fixes sad,
Sometimes towards Heaven and the full-blazing Sun,
Which now sat high in his Meridian Tower:
Then much revolving, thus in sighs began.



O thou that with surpassing Glory crowned,
Look from thy sole Dominion like the God
Of this new World; at whose sight all the Stars
Hide their diminished heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name
O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy Sphere;
Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heavens matchless King:
Ah wherefore! he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less then to afford him praise,
The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I stained subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude, 


So burdensome still paying, still to ow;
Forgetful what from him I still received,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and discharged; what burden then?
O had his powerful Destiny ordained
Me some inferior Angel, I had stood
Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition.  Yet why not? some other Power
As great might have aspired, and me though mean
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshaken, from within
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Had thou the same free Will and Power to stand?
Thou had: whom has thou then or what to accuse,
But Heavens free Love dealt equally to all?
Be then his Love accursed, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay cursed be thou; since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues.
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair?
Which way I fly is Hell; my self am Hell;
And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
O then at last relent: is there no place
Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word

Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Then to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent.  Ay me, they little know 

How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan;
While they adore me on the Throne of Hell,
With Diadem and Sceptre high advanced
The lower still I fall, only Supreme
In misery; such joy Ambition finds.
But say I could repent and could obtain
By Act of Grace my former state; how soon
Would height recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore: ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconciling grow
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my punisher; therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging peace:.
All hope excluded thus, behold in stead
Of us out-cast, exiled, his new delight,
Mankind created, and for him this World.
So farewell Hope, and with Hope farewell Fear,
Farewell Remorse: all Good to me is lost;
Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least
Divided Empire with Heavens King I hold
By thee, and more then half perhaps will reign;
As Man ere long, and this new World shall know.



Thus while he spake, each passion dimmed his face
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy and despair,
Which mart his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld.
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul
Are ever clear.  Whereof he soon aware,
Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm, 

Artificer of fraud; and was the first
That practiced falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couched with revenge:
Yet not enough had practiced to deceive

Uriel once warned; whose eye pursued him down
The way he went, and on theAssyrian mount
Saw him disfigured, more then could befall
Spirit of happy sort: his gestures fierce
He marked and mad demeanour, then alone,
As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen.
So on he fares, and to the border comes,
Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green,
As with a rural mound the champagne head
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides
With thicket overgrown, gottesque and wilde,
Access denied; and over head up grew
Insuperable height of loftiest shade,
Cedar, and Pine, and Fur, and branching Palm,
A Sylvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend
Shade above shade, a woody Theatre
Of stateliest view.  Yet higher then their tops
The verdurous wall of paradise up sprung:
Which to our general Sire gave prospect large
Into his nether Empire neighbouring round.
And higher then that Wall a circling row
Of goodliest Trees laden with fairest Fruit,
Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue
Appeared, with gay enamelled colours mixed:
On which the Sun more glad impressed his beams
Then in fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow,
When God hath showered the earth; so lovely seemed
That Landscape: And of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires 

Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair: now gentle gales
Fanning their odoriferous wings dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmy spoils.  As when to them who sail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past

Mozambic, off at Sea North-East winds blow

Sabean Odours from the spicy shore
Of Arabia the blessed, with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a League
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles.
So entertained those odorous sweets the Fiend
Who came their bane, though with them better pleased
Then Asmodeus with the fishy fume,
That drove him, though enamoured, from the Spouse
Of Tobits Son, and with a vengeance sent
From Media post to ??gypped, there fast
bound.


Now to The ascent of that steep savage Hill

Satan had journeyed on, pensive and slow;
But further way found none, so thick entwined,
As one continued brake, the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed
All path of Man or Beast that past that way:
One Gate there only was, and that looked East
On the other side: which when th'arch-fellon saw
Due entrance he disdained, and in contempt,
At one slight bound high over leaped all bound
Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer within
Lights on his feet.  As when a prowling Wolf,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey,
Watching where Shepherds pen their Flocks at eave
In hurdled Cotes amid the field secure,
Leaps o'er the fence with ease into the Fouled:.
Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash 

Of some rich Burgher, whose substantial doors,
Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbs, or o'er the tiles;
So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fouled:
So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climb.
Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life,
The middle Tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life
Thereby regained, but sat devising Death
To them who lived; nor on the virtue thought
Of that life-giving Plant, but only used
For prospect, what well used had bin the pledge
Of immortality.  So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views
To all delight of human sense exposed
In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth, for blissful Paradise

Of God the Garden was, by him in the East
Of Eden planted; Eden stretched her Line
From Auran Eastward to the Royal Towers
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian Kings,
Or where the Sons of Eden long before
Dwelt in Telassar: in this pleasant soil
His far more pleasant Garden God ordained;
Out of the fertile ground he cause to grow
All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
And all amid them stood the Tree of Life,
High eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit
Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life
Our Death the Tree of knowledge grew fast by,
Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill. 


Southward through Eden went a River large,
Nor changed his course, but through the shaggy hill
Passed underneath engulfed, for God had thrown
That Mountain as his Garden mould high raised
Upon the rapid current, which through veins
Of porous Earth with kindly thirst up drawn,
Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill
Watered the Garden; thence united fell
Down the steep glade, and met the nether Flood,
Which from his darksome passage now appears,
And now divided into four main Streams,
Runs divers, wandering many a famous Realm
And Country whereof here needs no account,
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that Sapphire Fount the crisped Brooks,
Rolling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold,
With mazy error under pendant shades
Ran Nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
Flours worthy of Paradise which not nice Art
In Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon
Poured forth profuse on Hill and Dale and Plain,
Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierced shade
Imbround the noontide Bowers: Thus was this place,
A happy rural seat of various view;
Groves whose rich Trees wept odorous Gumms and Balm,
Others whose fruit burnished with Golden Rind
Hung amiable, Hesperian Fables true,
If true, here only, and of delicious taste:
Betwixt them Lawns, or level Downs, and Flocks
Grazing the tender herb, were interposed,
Or palmy hellos, or the flowery lap
Of some irriguous Valley spread her store,
Flours of all hue, and without Thorn the Rose: 

Another side, umbrageous Grots and Caves
Of cool recess, o'er which the mantling vine
Lays forth her purple Grape, and gently creeps
Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall
Down the slope hills, dispersed, or in a Lake,
That to the fringed Bank with Myrtle crowned,
Her crystal mirror holds, unite their streams.
The Birds their quire apply; aires, vernal aires,
Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves, while Universal Pan

Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance
Led on the Eternal Spring.  Not that fair field
Of Enna, where Proserpin gathering flours
Her self a fairer Flower by gloomy Dis

Was gathered, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world; nor that sweet Grove
Of Daphne by Orontes, and the inspired

Castalian Spring, might with this Paradise

Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian Isle
Girt with the River Triton, where old Cham,
Whom Gentiles
Ammon call and Lybian
Jove,
Hid Amalthea and her Florid Son
Young Bacchus from his Stepdame Rhea's eye;
Nor where Abassin Kings their issue Guard,
Mount Amara, though this by some supposed
True Paradise under the Ethiop Line
By Nilus head, enclosed with shining Rock,
A whole days journey high, but wide remote
From this Assyrian Garden, where the Fiend
Saw undelighted all delight, all kind
Of living Creatures new to sight and strange:
Two of far nobler shape erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native Honour clad
In naked Majesty seemed Lords of all,

And worthy seemed, for in their looks Divine
The image of their glorious Maker shone,
Truth, wisdom, Sanctitude severe and pure,
Severe but in true filial freedom placed;
Whence true authority in men; though both
Not equal, as their sex not equal seemed;
For contemplation he and valour formed,
For softness she and sweet attractive Grace,
He for God only, she for God in him:
His fair large Front and Eye sublime declared
Absolute rule; and Hyacinthin Locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clustering, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
She as a veil down to the slender waste
Her unadorned golden tresses wore
Disheveled, but in wanton ringlets waved
As the Vine curls her tendrils, which implied
Subjection, but required with gentle sway,
And by her yielded, by him best received,
Yielded with coy submission, modest pride,
And sweet reluctant amorous delay.
Nor those mysterious parts were then concealed,
Then was not guilty shame, dishonest shame
Of natures works, honour dishonourable,
Sin-bred, how have ye troubled all mankind
With shows instead, mere shows of seeming pure,
And banished from mans life his happiest life,
Simplicity and spotless innocence.
So passed they naked on, nor shunned the sight
Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill:
So hand in hand they passed, the loveliest pair
That ever since in loves embraces met,

Adam the goodliest man of men since borne
His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters Eve. 

Under a tuft of shade that on a green
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh Fountain side
They sat them down, and after no more toil
Of their sweet Gardening labour then sufficed
To recommend cool Zephyr, and made ease
More easy, wholesome thirst and appetite
More grateful, to their Supper Fruits they fell,
Nectarine Fruits which the compliant boughs
Yielded them, side-long as they sat recline
On the soft downy Bank damasked with flours:
The savoury pulp they chew, and in the rind
Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming stream;
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles
Wanted, nor youthful dalliance as seems
Fair couple, linked in happy nuptial League,
Alone as they.  About them frisking played
All Beasts of the Earth, since wilde, and of all chase
In Wood or Wilderness, Forest or Den;
Sporting the Lion rampd, and in his paw
Dandled the Kid; Bears, Tigers, Ounces, Pards,
Gambold before them, th'unwieldy Elephant
To make them mirth used all his might, and wreathed
His Lithe Proboscis; close the Serpent sly
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine
His breaded train, and of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass
Couched, and now filled with pasture gazing sat,
Or Bedward ruminating: for the Sun
Declined was hasting now with prone career
To the Ocean Isles, and in the ascending Scale
Of Heaven the Stars that usher Evening rose:
When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood,
Scarce thus at length failed speech recovered sad.



O Hell! what doe mine eyes with grief behold,

Into our room of bliss thus high advanced
Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,
Not Spirits, yet to heavenly Spirits bright
Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
In them Divine resemblance, and such grace
The hand that formed them on their shape hath poured.
Ah gentle pair, ye little think how nigh
Your change approaches, when all these delights
Will vanish and deliver ye to woe,
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;
Happy, but for so happy ill secured
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heaven
Ill fenced for Heaven to keep out such a foe
As now is entered; yet no purposed foe
To you whom I could pity thus forlorn
Though I unpitied: League with you I seek,
And mutual amity so straight, so close,
That I with you must dwell, or you with me
Henceforth; my dwelling happily may not please
Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such
Accept your Makers work; he gave it me,
Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfold,
To entertain you two, her widest Gates,
And send forth all her Kings; there will be room,
Not like these narrow limits, to receive
Your numerous offspring; if no better place,
Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge
On you who wrong me not for him who wronged.
And should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I doe, yet public reason just,
Honour and Empire with revenge enlarged,
By conquering this new World, compels me now
To do what else though damned I should abhor. 





So spake the Fiend, and with necessity,
The Tyrants plea, excused his devilish deeds.
Then from his lofty stand on that high Tree
Down he alights among the sportful Herd
Of those fourfooted kinds, himself now one,
Now other, as their shape served best his end
Nearer to view his prey, and unespi'd
To mark what of their state he more might learn
By word or action marked: about them round
A Lion now he stalks with fiery glare,
Then as a Tiger, who by chance hath spied
In some Purlieu two gentle Fawns at play,
Strait couches close, then rising changes oft
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground
Whence rushing he might surest seize them both
Gripped in each paw: When Adam first of men
To first of women Eve thus moving speech,
Turned him all ear to hear new utterance flow.



Sole partner and sole part of all these joys,
Dearer thy self then all; needs must the power
That made us, and for us this ample World
Be infinitely good, and of his good
As liberal and free as infinite,
That raised us from the dust and placed us here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can perform
Aught whereof he hath need, he who requires
From us no other service then to keep
This one, this easy charge, of all the Trees
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit
So various, not to taste that only Tree
Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life,
So near grows Death to Life, what ere Death is,
Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou know 

God hath pronounced it death to taste that Tree,
The only sign of our obedience left
Among so many signs of power and rule
Conferred upon us, and Dominion given
Over all other Creatures that possess
Earth, Air, and Sea.  Then let us not think hard
One easy prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited of manifold delights:
But let us ever praise him, and extol
His bounty, following our delightful task
To prune these growing Plants, and tend these Flours,
Which were it toilsome, yet with thee were sweet.



To whom thus Eve replied.
 O thou for whom
And from whom I was formed flesh of thy flesh,
And without whom am to no end, my Guide
And Head, what thou has said is just and right.
For wee to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks, I chiefly who enjoy
So far the happier Lot, enjoying thee
Pr??eminent by so much odds, while thou
Like consort to thy self can no where find.
That day I oft remember, when from sleep
I first awaked, and found my self reposed
Under a shade of flours, much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issued from a Cave and spread
Into a liquid Plain, then stood unmoved
Pure as the expanse of Heaven; I thither went
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth Lake, that to me seemed another Sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite, 


A Shape within the watery gleam appeared
Bending to look on me, I started back,
It started back, but pleased I soon returned,
Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks
Of sympathy and love; there I had fixed
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warned me,  
What thou see,
What there thou see fair Creature is thy self,
With thee it came and goes: but follow me,
And I will bring thee where no shadow stays
Thy coming, and thy soft embraces, he
Whose image thou art, him thou shall enjoy
Inseparably thine, to him shalt bear
Multitudes like thy self, and thence be called
Mother of human Race:  what could I
doe,
But follow strait, invisibly thus led?
Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall,
Under a Platen, yet methought less fair,
Less winning soft, less amiably mild,
Then that smooth watery image; back I turned,
Thou following cried aloud,  
Return fair Eve,
Whom fliest thou? whom thou fliest, of him thou art,
His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent
Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart
Substantial Life, to have thee by my side
Henceforth an individual solace dear;
Part of my Soul I seek thee, and thee claim
My other half:  with that thy gentle
hand
See mine, I yielded, and from that time see
How beauty is excelled by manly grace
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.



So spake our general Mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreproved,
And meek surrender, half embracing leant 

On our first Father, half her swelling Breast
Naked met his under the flowing Gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms
Smiled with superior Love, as Jupiter

On Juno smiles, when he impregns the Clouds
That shed May Flowers; and pressed her Matron lip
With kisses pure: aside the Devil turned
For envy, yet with jealous leer malign
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus plaint.



Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two
Imparadised in one another arms
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfilled with pain of longing pines;
Yet let me not forget what I have gained
From their own mouths; all is not theirs it seems:
One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge called,
Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidden?
Suspicious, reasonless.  Why should their Lord
Envy them that? can it be sin to know,
Can it be death? and do they only stand
By Ignorance, is that their happy state,
The proof of their obedience and their faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Their ruin! Hence I will excite their minds
With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with design
To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such,
They taste and die: what likelier can ensue?
But first with narrow search I must walk round 


This Garden, and no corner leave unspi'd;
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven, by Fountain side,
Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw
What further would be learnt.  Live while ye may,
Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed.



So saying, his proud step he scornful turned,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, o'er hill, o'er dale his roam.
Mean while in utmost Longitude, where Heaven
With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern Gate of Paradise

Leveled his evening Rays: it was a Rock
Of Alabaster, piled up to the Clouds,
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent
Accessible from Earth, one entrance high;
The rest was craggy cliff, that overhung
Still as it rose, impossible to climb.
Betwixt these rocky Pillars Gabriel sat
Chief of the Angelic Guards, awaiting night;
About him exercised Heroic Games
The unarmed Youth of Heaven, but nigh at hand
Celestial Armoury, Shields, Helmes, and Spears,
Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold.
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the Even
On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Star
In Autumn thwarts the night, when vapors fired
Impress the Air, and shows the Mariner
From what point of his Compass to beware
Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste.




Gabriel, to thee thy course by Lot hath given
Charge and strict watch that to this happy Place 

No evil thing approach or enter in;
This day at height of Noon came to my Sphere
A Spirit, zealous, as he seemed, to know
More of the Almighty's works, and chiefly Man
Gods latest Image: I described his way
Bent all on speed, and marked his Aerie Gate;
But in the Mount that lies from Eden North,
Where he first lighted, soon discerned his looks
Alien from Heaven, with passions foul obscured:
Mine eye pursued him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him; one of the banished crew
I fear, hath ventured from the deep, to raise
New troubles; him thy care must be to find.



To whom the winged Warrior thus returned:


Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight,
Amid the Suns bright circle where thou sits,
See far and wide: in at this Gate none pass
The vigilance here placed, but such as come
Well known from Heaven; and since Meridian hour
No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have over leapt these earthy bounds
On purpose, hard thou know it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal barr.
But if within the circuit of these walks,
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou tells, by morrow dawning I shall know.



So promised he, and Uriel to his charge
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raised
Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fallen
Beneath theAzores; whither the prime Orb,
Incredible how swift, had thither rolled
Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth
By shorter flight to the East, had left him there
Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold 
some copies have '101'


The Clouds that on his Western Throne attend:
Now came still Evening on, and Twilight gray
Had in her sober Livery all things clad;
Silence accompanied, for Beast and Bird,
They to their grassy Couch, these to their Nests
Were slunk, all but the wakeful Nightingale;
She all night long her amorous descant sung;
Silence was pleased: now glowed the Firmament
With living Sapphires: Hesperus that led
The starry Host, rode brightest, till the Moon
Rising in clouded Majesty, at length
Apparent Queen unveiled her peerless light,
And o'er the dark her Silver Mantle threw.


When Adam thus to Eve:
 Fair Consort, the hour
Of night, and all things now retired to rest
Mind us of like repose, since God hath set
Labour and rest, as day and night to men
Successive, and the timely dew of sleep
Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines
Our eye-lids; other Creatures all day long
Rove idle unemployed, and less need rest;
Man hath his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his Dignity, A
nd the regard of Heaven on all his ways;
While other Animals unactive range,
And of their doings God takes no account.
To morrow ere fresh Morning streak the East
With first approach of light, we must be risen,
And at our pleasant labour, to reform
Yon flowery Arbors, yonder Allies green,
Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown,
That mock our scant manuring, and require
More hands then ours to lop their wanton growth:
Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms, 

That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;
Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest.



To whom thus Eve with perfect beauty  adorned.

My Author and Disposer, what thou bid
Unargu'd I obey; so God ordains,
God is thy Law, thou mine: to know no more
Is women's happiest knowledge and her praise.
With thee conversing I forget all time,
All seasons and their change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest Birds; pleasant the Sun
When first on this delightful Land he spreads
His orient Beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flour,
Glistering with dew; fragrant the fertile earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful Evening mild, then silent Night
With this her solemn Bird and this fair Moon,
And these the Gems of Heaven, her starry train:
But neither breath of Morn when she ascends
With charm of earliest Birds, nor rising Sun
On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, flower,
Glistering with dew, nor fragrance after showers,
Nor grateful Evening mild, nor silent Night
With this her solemn Bird, nor walk by Moon,
Or glittering Starr-light without thee is sweet.
But wherefore all night long shine these, for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?



To whom our general Ancestor replied.

Daughter of God and Man, accomplished Eve,
Those have their course to finish, round the Earth,
By morrow Evening, and from Land to Land
In order, though to Nations yet unborn,
Ministering light prepared, they set and rise; 

Least total darkness should by Night regain
Her old possession, and extinguish life
In Nature and all things, which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat
Of various influence foment and warm,
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow
On Earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none,
That heaven would want spectators, God want praise;
Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:.
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold
Both day and night: how often from the steep
Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others note
Singing their great Creator: oft in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk
With Heavenly touch of instrumental sounds
In full harmonic number joint, their songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.



Thus talking hand in hand alone they passed
On to their blissful Bower; it was a place
Chosen by the soverign Planter, when he framed
All things to mans delightful use; the roof
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade
Laurel and Myrtle, and what higher grew
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side

Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub
Fenced up the verdant wall; each beauteous flour,

Iris all hues, Roses, and Gessamin 

Reared high their flourished heads between, and wrought
Mosaic; underfoot the Violet,
Crocus, and Hyacinth with rich inlay
Broiderd the ground, more coloured then with stone
Of costliest Emblem: other Creature here
Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm dared enter none;
Such was their awe of Man.  In shady Bower
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned,

Pan or Silvanus never slept, nor Nymph,
Nor Faunus haunted.  Here in close recess
With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet-smelling Herbs
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial Bed,
And heavenly Quires the Hymenae??an sung,
What day the genial Angel to our Sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned,
More lovely then Pandora, whom the Gods
Endowed with all their gifts, and O too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser Son
Of Japhet brought by Harms, she ensnared
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged
On him who had stole Joves authentic fire.


Thus at their shady Lodge arrived, both stood
Both turned, and under open Sky adored
The God that made both Sky, Air, Earth and Heaven
Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe
And starry Pole:  Thou also
made the Night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day,
Which we in our appointed work employed
Have finished happy in our mutual help
And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss
Ordained by thee, and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou has promised from us two a Race 

To fill the Earth, who shall with us extol
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.



This said unanimous, and other Rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower
Handed they went; and eased the putting off
These troublesome disguises which wee wear,
Strait side by side were laid, nor turned I wean

Adam from his fair Spouse, nor Eve the Rites
Mysterious of connubial Love refused:
Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk
Of purity and place and innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain
But our destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Hail wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source
Of human offspring, sole propriety,
In Paradise of all things common else.
By thee adulterous lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to range, by thee
Founded in Reason, Loyal, just, and Pure,
Relations dear, and all the Charities
Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unhindered, 

Casual fruition, nor in Court Amours
Mixed Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal,
Or Serenate, which the starved Lover sings
To his proud fair, best quited with disdain.
These lulled by Nightingales embracing slept,
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof
Showered Roses, which the Morn repaired.  Sleep on
Blessed pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.


Now had night measured with her shadow Cone
Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault,
And from their Ivory Port the Cherubim
Forth issuing at th'accustomd hour stood armed
To their night watches in warlike Parade,
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake.




Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the  South
With strictest watch; these other wheel the North,
Our circuit meets full West.   As
flame they part
Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear.
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he called
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge.
Ithuriel and Zephon, with winged speed
Search through this Garden, leave unsearched no nook,
But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harm.
This Evening from the Sun's decline arrived
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escaped
The bars of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such where ye find, seize fast, and hither bring. 



So saying, on he led his radiant Files,
Dazzling the Moon; these to the Bower direct
In search of whom they sought: him there they found
Squat like a Toad, close at the ear of Eve; 

Assaying by his Devilish art to reach
The Organs of her Fancy, and with them forge
Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams,
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
The animal Spirits that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise
At least distempered, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires
Blown up with high conceits engendering pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his Spear
Touched lightly; for no falsehood can endure
Touch of Celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness: up he starts
Discovered and surprised.  As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid
Fit for the Tun some Magazine to store
Against a rumoured War, the Smutty grain
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the Air:
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stepped those two fair Angels half amazed
So sudden to behold the grisly King;
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon.



Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell
Come thou, escaped thy prison, and transformed,
Why sat thou like an enemy in wait
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?



Know ye not then said Satan, filled  with
scorn,

Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye dared not soar;
Not to know me argues your selves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?

To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn. 


Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminished brightness, to be known
As when thou stood in Heaven upright and pure;
That Glory then, when thou no more was good,
Departed from thee, and thou resembles now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.



So spake the Cherub, and his grave rebuke
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible: abashed the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely, saw, and pined
His loss; but chiefly to find here observed
His lustre visibly impaired; yet seemed
Undaunted.  If I must contend,
 said he,

Best with the best, the Sender not the sent,
Or all at once; more glory will be won,
Or less be lost.  Thy fear,
 said Zephon  bold,
Will save us trial what the least can doe
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.



The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage;
But like a proud Steed reined, went haughty on,
Champing his iron curb: to strive or fly
He held it vain; awe from above had quelled
His heart, not else dismayed.  Now drew they nigh
The western Point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joint
Awaiting next command.  To whom their Chief

Gabriel from the Front thus called aloud.



O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern

Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade, 

And with them comes a third of Regal port,
But faded splendour wan; who by his gate
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours. 



He scarce had ended, when those two approached
And brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture couched.


To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake.
 Why has thou, Satan broke
the bounds prescribed
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Employed it seems to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss? 



To whom thus Satan, with contemptuous brow.


Gabriel, thou had in Heaven the esteem of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question asked
Puts me in doubt.  Lives there who loves his pain?
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomed? Thou would thy self, no doubt,
And boldly venture to whatever place
Farthest from pain, where thou might hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason; who know only good,
But evil has not tried: and wilt object
His will who bound us? let him surer barr
His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance: thus much what was asked.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harm.



Thus he in scorn.The warlike Angel moved,

Disdainfully half smiling thus replied.

O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise,
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison escaped,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, and to escape his punishment.
So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrath,
Which thou incurs by flying, meet thy flight
seven fold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provoked.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them
Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they
Less hardy to endure? courageous Chief,
The first in flight from pain, had thou alleged
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely had not come sole fugitive. 



To which the Fiend thus answered frowning stern.

Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel, well thou know I stood
Thy fiercest, when in Battle to thy aide
Thy blasting volleyed Thunder made all speed
And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behoves
From hard assays and ill successes past
A faithful Leader, not to hazard all
Through ways of danger by himself untried.
I therefore, I alone first undertook 


To wing the desolate Abyss, and spy
This new created World, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on Earth, or in mid Air;
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay Legions dare against;
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his Throne,
And practised distances to cringe, not fight.



To whom the warrior Angel, soon replied.

To say and strait unsay, pretending first
Wise to fly pain, professing next the Spy,
Argues no Leader but a liar traced,

Satan, and could thou faithful add?  O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head;
Was this your discipline and faith engaged,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegiance to the acknowldged Power supreme?
And thou sly hypocrite, who now would seem
Patron of liberty, who more then thou
Once fawned, and cringed, and servilly adored
Heavens awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope
To dispossess him, and thy self to reign?
But mark what I arreede thee now, avaunt;
Fly thither whence thou fled: if from this hour
Within these hallowed limits thou appear,
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained,
And Seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
The facile gates of hell too slightly barred. 



So threatened he, but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied. 




Then when I am thy captive talk of chains,
Proud limitarie Cherub, but ere then
Far heavier load thy self expect to feel
From my prevailing arm, though Heavens King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers,
Used to the yoke, draw his triumphant wheels
In progress through the rode of Heaven Star-paved.



While thus he spake, the Angelic Squadron bright
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns
Their Phalanx, and began to hemm him round
With ported Spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them; the careful Ploughmen doubting stands
Least on the threshing floor his hopeful sheaves
Prove chaff. On the other side Satan alarmed
Collecting all his might dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas unremoved:
His stature reached the Sky, and on his Crest
Sat horror Plumed; nor wanted in his grasp
What seemed both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise

In this commotion, but the Starry Cope
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the Elements
At least had gon to rack, disturbed and torn
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
the Eternal to prevent such horrid fray
Hung forth in Heaven his golden Scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
Wherein all things created first he weight,
The pendulous round Earth with balanced Air
In counterpoised, now ponders all events,
Battles and Realms: in these he put two weights
The sequel each of parting and of fight; 


The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam;
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespoke the Fiend.




Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know  mine,
Neither our own but given; what folly then
To boast what Arms can doe, since thine no more
Then Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now
To trample thee as mire: for proof look up,
And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist.   The Fiend looked up
and knew
His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.
The End of the Fourth Book.

