
            Paradise Lost. BOOK VIII.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            
Adam enquires concerning celestial Motions, is doubtfully
 answered, and exhorted to search rather things more worthy of 
knowledge: Adam assents, and still desirous to detain Raphael,
 relates to him what he remembered since his own Creation, his  placing
in Paradise, his talk with God  concerning solitude and
fit society, his first meeting and  Nuptials with Eve, his
discourse with the Angel thereupon; who  after admonitions repeated
departs.

THE Angel ended, and in Adams Ear
So Charming left his voice, that he a while
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear;
Then as new waked thus gratefully replied.

 What thanks sufficient, or what
recompense
Equal have I to render thee, Divine
Historian, who thus largely has allayed
The thirst I had of knowledge, and Vouchsafed

This friendly condescension to relate
Things else by me unsearchable, now heard
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due,
With glory attributed to the high
Creator; something yet of doubt remains,
Which only thy solution can resolve.
When I behold this goodly Frame, this World
Of Heaven and Earth consisting, and compute,
Their magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a grain,
An Atom, with the Firmament compared
And all her numbered Stars, that seem to roll
Spaces incomprehensible (for such
Their distance argues and their swift return
Diurnal) merely to officiate light
Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,
One day and night; in all their vast survey
Useless besides, reasoning I oft admire,
How Nature wise and frugal could commit
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
So many nobler Bodies to create,
Greater so manifold to this one use,
For aught appears, and on their Orbs impose
Such restless revolution day by day
Repeated, while the sedentary Earth,
That better might with far less compass move,
Served by more noble then her self, attains
Her end without least motion, and receives,
As Tribute such a sumless journey brought
Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light;
Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number fails. 


So spake our Sire, and by his countenance seemed
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse, which Eve

Perceiving where she sat retired in sight,
With lowliness Majestic from her seat,


And Grace that won who saw to wish her stay,
Rose, and went forth among her Fruits and Flours,
To visit how they prospered, bud and bloom,
Her Nursery; they at her coming sprung
And touched by her fair tendency gladlier grew.
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
Delighted, or not capable her ear
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved,

Adam relating, she sole Auditress;
Her Husband the Relater she preferred
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather; he, she knew would intermix
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal Caresses, from his Lip
Not Words alone pleased her.  O when meet now
Such pairs, in Love and mutual Honour joined?
With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went;
Not unattended, for on her as Queen
A pomp of winning Graces waited still,
And from about her shot Darts of desire
Into all Eyes to wish her still in sight.
And Raphael now to Atom's doubt proposed
Benevolent and facile thus replied.



To ask or search I blame thee not, for Heaven
Is as the Book of God before thee set,
Wherein to read his wondrous Works, and learn
His Seasons, Hours, or Days, or Months, or Years:
This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth,
Imports not, if thou reckon right, the rest
From Man or Angel the great Architect
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge
His secrets to be scanned by them who ought
Rather admire; or if they list to try
Conjecture, he his Fabric of the Heavens

Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move
His laughter at their quaint Opinions wide
Hereafter, when they come to model Heaven
And calculate the Stars, how they will wield
The mighty frame, how build, unbuild, contrive
To save appearances, how gird the Sphere
With Centres and Eccentric scribbled o'er,
Cycle and Epicycle, Orb in Orb:
Already by thy reasoning this I guess,
Who art to lead thy offspring, and suppose
That bodies bright and greater should not serve
The less not bright, nor Heaven such journeys run,
Earth sitting still, when she alone receives
The benefit: consider first, that Great
Or Bright infers not Excellence: the Earth
Though, in comparison of Heaven, so small,
Nor glistening, may of solid good contain
More plenty then the Sun that barren shines
Whose virtue on it self works no effect,
But in the fruitful Earth; there first received
His beams, unactive else, their vigour find.
Yet not to Earth are those bright Luminaries
Officious, but to thee Earths habitant.
And for the Heavens wide Circuit, let it speak
The Makers high magnificence, who built
So spacious, and his Line stretched out so far;
That Man may know he dwells not in his own;
An Edifice too large for him to fill,
Lodged in a small partition, and the rest
Ordained for uses to his Lord best known.
The swiftness of those Circles attribute
Though numberless, to his Omnipotence,
That to corporeal substances could add
Speed almost Spiritual; me thou think not slow,


Who since the Morning hour set out from Heaven
Where God resides, and ere mid-day arrived
In Eden, distance inexpressible
By Numbers that have name.  But this I urge,
Admitting Motion in the Heavens, to show
Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved;
Not that I so affirm, though so it seem
To thee who has thy dwelling here on Earth.
God to remove his ways from human sense,
Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight,
If it presume, might err in things too high,
And no advantage gain.  What if the Sun
Be Center to the World, and other Stars
By his attractive virtue and their own
Incited, dance about him various rounds?
Their wandering course now high, now low, then hid,
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
In six thou see, and what if seventh to these
The Planet Earth, so steadfast though she seem,
Insensibly three different Motions move?
Which else to several Spears thou must ascribe,
Moved contrary with thwart obliquities,
Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift
Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb supposed,
Invisible else above all Stars, the Wheel
Of Day and Night; which needs not thy belief,
If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day
Travelling East, and with her part averse
From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part
Still luminous by his ray.  What if that light
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air,
To the terrestrial Moon be as a Star
Enlightening her by Day, as she by Night
This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there,

Fields and Inhabitants: Her spots thou see
As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce
Fruits in her softened Soil, for some to eat
Allotted there; and other Suns perhaps
With their attendant Moons thou wilt descry
Communicating Male and Female Light,
Which two great Sexes animate the World,
Stored in each Orb perhaps with some that live.
For such vast room in Nature unpossessed
By living Soul, desert and desolate,
Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute
Each Orb a glimpse of Light, conveyed so far
Down to this habitable, which returns
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.
But whether thus these things, or whether not,
Whether the Sun predominant in Heaven
Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun
He from the East his flaming rode begin,
Or She from West her silent course advance
With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps
On her soft Axle, while she paces Even,
And bears thee soft with the smooth Air along,
Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid,
Leave them to God above, him serve and fear;
Of other Creatures, as him pleases best,
Wherever placed, let him dispose: joy thou
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise

And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thee too high
To know what passes there; be lowly wise:.
Think only what concerns thee and thy being;
Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there
Live, in what state, condition or degree,
Contented that thus far hath been revealed
Not of Earth only but of highest Heaven.





To whom thus Adam cleared of doubt, replied.

 How fully has thou satisfied me,
pure
Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene,
And freed from intricacies, taught to live,
The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not molest us, unless we our selves
Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain.
But apt the Mind or Fancy is to roave
Unchecked, and of her roving is no end;
Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn,
That not to know at large of things remote
From use, obscure and subtle, but to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume,
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence,
And renders us in things that most concern
Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek.
Therefore from this high pitch let us descend
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
Useful, whence happily mention may arise
Of something not unseasonable to ask
By sufferance, and thy wonted favour deigned.
Thee I have heard relating what was don
Ere my remembrance: now hear me relate
My Story, which perhaps thou has not heard;
And Day is yet not spent; till then thou see
How subtly to detain thee I devise,
Inviting thee to hear while I relate,
Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply:
For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven,
And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear
Then Fruits of Palm-tree pleasantest to thirst

And hunger both, from labour, at the hour
Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety.

 To whom thus Raphael
answered heavenly meek.



Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured
Inward and outward both, his image fair:
Speaking or mute all comeliness and grace
Attends thee, and each word, each motion forms,
Nor less think wee in Heaven of thee on Earth
Then of our fellow servant, and inquire
Gladly into the ways of God with Man:
For God we see hath honoured thee, and set
On Man his Equal Love: say therefore on;
For I that Day was absent, as befell,
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,
Far on excursion toward the Gates of Hell;
Squared in full Legion (such command we had)
To see that none thence issued forth a spy,
Or enemy, while God was in his work,
Least he incensed at such eruption bold,
Destruction with Creation might have mixed.
Not that they dared without his leave attempt,
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state, as Soverign King, and to enure
Our prompt obedience.  Fast we found, fast shut
The dismal Gates, and barricaded strong;
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song,
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage.
Glad we returned up to the coasts of Light
Ere Sabbath Evening: so we had in charge.

But thy relation now; for I attend,
Pleased with thy words no less then thou with mine.



So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.

 For Man to tell how human Life began
Is hard; for who himself beginning knew?
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induced me.  As new waked from soundest sleep
Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid
In Balmy Sweat, which with his Beams the Sun
Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed.
Strait toward Heaven my wondering Eyes I turned,
And gazed a while the ample Sky, till raised
By quick instinctive motion up I sprung,
As thitherward endeavouring, and upright
Stood on my feet; about me round I saw
Hill, Dale, and shady Woods, and sunny Plains,
And liquid Lapse of murmuring Streams; by these,
Creatures that livd, and moved, and walked, or flew,
Birds on the branches warbling; all things smiled,
With fragrance and with joy my heart overflowed.
My self I then perused, and Limb by Limb
Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
With supple joints, and lively vigour led:
But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
Knew not; to speak I tried, and forthwith spake
My Tongue obeyed and readily could name
What ever I saw.  Thou Sun, said I, fair Light,
And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay,
Ye Hills and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plains,
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here?
Not of my self; by some great Maker then,
In goodness and in power pr??eminent;
Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,

From whom I have that thus I move and live,
And feel that I am happier then I know.
While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither,
From where I first drew Air, and first beheld
This happy Light, when answer none returned,
On a green shady Bank profuse of Flours
Pensive I sate me down; there gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression seized
My drowsed sense, untroubled, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:
When suddenly stood at my Head a dream,
Whose inward apparition gently moved
My fancy to believe I yet had being,
And lived: One came, methought, of shape Divine,
And said,  thy Mansion wants thee,
Adam, rise,
First Man, of Men innumerable ordained
First Father, called by thee I come thy Guide
To the Garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.

 So saying, by the hand he took me
raised,
And over Fields and Waters, as in Air
Smooth sliding without step, last led me up
A woody Mountain; whose high top was plain,
A Circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest Trees
Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw
Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemed.  Each Tree
Load'n with fairest Fruit that hung to the Eye
Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite
To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found
Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream
Had lively shadowed: Here had new begun
My wandering, had not he who was my Guide
Up hither, from among the Trees appeared
Presence Divine.  Rejoicing, but with awe

In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiss: he reared me, and  Whom thou
soughtst I am,

 Said mildly,
 Author of all this thou see
Above, or round about thee or beneath.
This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eat:
Of every Tree that in the Garden grows
Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth:
But of the Tree whose operation brings
Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set
The Pledge of thy Obedience and thy Faith
Amid the Garden by the Tree of Life
Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste,
And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
The day thou eats thereof, my sole command
Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt dye;
From that day mortal, and this happy State
Shalt loose, expelled from hence into a World
Of woe and sorrow.   Sternly he
pronounced
The rigid interdiction, which resounds
Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice
Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect
Returned and gracious purpose thus renewed.

 Not only these fair bounds, but all
the Earth
To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in Sea, or Air, Beast, Fish, and Foul.
In sign whereof each Bird and Beast behold
After their kinds; I bring them to receive
From thee their Names, and pay thee fealty
With low subjection; understand the same
Of Fish within their watery residence,
Not hither summoned, since they cannot change
Their Element to draw the thinner Air.


 As thus he spake, each Bird and
Beast behold
Approaching two and two, These cowering low
With blandishment, each Bird stooped on his wing.
I named them, as they passed, and understood
Their Nature, with such knowledge God endued
My sudden apprehension: but in these
I found not what me thought I wanted still;
And to the Heavenly vision thus presumed.



O by what Name, for thou above all these,
Above mankind, or aught then mankind higher,
Surpassest far my naming, how may I
Adore thee, Author of this Universe,
And all this good to man, for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal
Thou has provided all things: but with me
I see not who partakes.  In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright,
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied. 

 What call thou solitude, is not
the Earth
With various living creatures, and the Air
Replenished, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee, know thou not
Their language and their ways, they also know,
And reason not contemptibly; with these
Find pastime, and bear rule; thy Realm is large.

 So spake the Universal Lord, and
seemed
So ordering.  I with leave of speech implored,
And humble deprecation thus replied.


Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power,
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
has thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferior far beneath me set?

Among unequals what society
Can sort, what harmony or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received; but in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss
Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight, wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort; they rejoice
Each with their kind, Lion with Lioness;
So fitly them in pairs thou has combined;
Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Foul
So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape;
Worse then can Man with Beast, and least of all.
Where to the almighty answered, not displeased. 

 A nice and subtle happiness I see
Thou to thy self propose, in the choice
Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What think thou then of me, and this my State,
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all Eternity, for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse
Save with the Creatures which I made, and those
To me inferior, infinite descents
Beneath what other Creatures are to thee?

 He ceased, I lowly answered. To
attain
The height and depth of thy Eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things;
Thou in thy self art perfect, and in thee
Is no deficiency found; not so is Man,

But in degree, the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help,
Or solace his defects.  No need that thou
Should propagate, already infinite;
And through all numbers absolute, though One;
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his Image multiplied,
In unity defective, which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secrecy although alone,
Best with thy self accompanied, seek not
Social communication, yet so pleased,
Can raise thy Creature to what height thou wilt
Of Union or Communion, deified;
I by conversing cannot these erect
From prone, nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found, which gained
This answer from the gracious voice Divine. 



Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased,
And find thee knowing not of Beasts alone,
Which thou has rightly named, but of thy self,
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My Image, not imparted to the Brute,
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely should dislike,
And be so minded still; I, ere thou spoke,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone,
And no such company as then thou saw
Intended thee, for trial only brought,
To see how thou could judge of fit and meet:
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,

Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.



He ended, or I heard no more, for now
My earthly by his Heavenly overpowered,
Which it had long stood under, strained to the height
In that celestial Colloquy sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense,
Dazzle d and spent, sunk down, and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aide, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the Cell
Of Fancy my internal sight, by which
Abstract as in a trance methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood;
Who stooping opened my left side, and took
From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warm,
And Life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
The Rib he formed and fashioned with his hands;
Under his forming hands a Creature grew,
Manlike, but different Sex, so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the World, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained
And in her looks, which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her Air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeared, and left me dark, I waked
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable: On she came,

Led by her Heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice, nor uninformed
Of nuptial Sanctity and marriage Rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her Eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.
I overjoyed could not forbear aloud.


This turn hath made amends; thou has fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
Giver of all things fair, but fairest this
Of all thy gifts, nor enviest.  I now see
Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh, my Self
Before me; Woman is her Name, of Man
Extracted; for this cause he shall forgo
Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere;
And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soul.


She heard me thus, and though divinely brought,
Yet Innocence and Virgin Modesty,
Her virtue and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retired,
The more desirable, or to say all,
Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turned;
I followed her, she what was Honour knew,
And with obsequious Majesty approved
My pleaded reason.  To the Nuptial Bower
I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heaven,
And happy Constellations on that hour
Shed their selectest influence; the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each Hill;
Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Aires
Whispered it to the Woods, and from their wings
Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicy Shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous Bird of Night

Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Evening Star
On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp.
Thus I have told thee all my State, and brought
My Story to the sum of earthly bliss
Which I enjoy, and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire, these delicacies
I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, and Flours,
Walks, and the melody of Birds; but here
Far otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch; here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else
Superior and unmoved, here only weak
Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance.
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such Object to sustain,
Or from my side subducting, took perhaps
More then enough; at least on her bestowed
Too much of Ornament, in outward show
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her th'inferiour, in the mind
And inward Faculties, which most excel,
In outward also her resembling less
His Image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that Dominion given
O'er other Creatures; yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in her self complete, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best;
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her

Looses discountenanced, and like folly shows;
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally; and to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and nobleness their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard Angelic placed.

 To whom the Angel with contracted
brow. 



Accuse not Nature, she hath don her part;
Do thou but thine, and be not diffident
Of Wisdom, she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou need her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thy self perceav'st.
For what admir'st thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love,
Not thy subjection: weigh with her thy self;
Then value: Oft times nothing profits more
Then self esteem, grounded on just and right
Well managed; of that skill the more thou know,
The more she will acknowledge thee her Head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honour thou may love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise.
But if the sense of touch whereby mankind
Is propagated seem such dear delight
Beyond all other, think the same Vouchsafed
To Cattle and each Beast; which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The Soul of Man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou finds


Attractive, human, rational, love still;
In loving thou does well, in passion not,
Wherein true Love consists not; love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges, hath his seat
In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale
By which to heavenly Love thou may ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause
Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found.



To whom thus half abashed Adam replied.

 Neither her out-side formed so fair,
nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds
(Though higher of the genial Bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem)
So much delights me as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with Love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of Mind, or in us both one Soul;
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful then harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing; yet still free
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love thou blanket me not, for love thou say
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide;
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask;
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their Love
Express they, by looks only, or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch? 



To whom the Angel with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosie red, Loves proper hue,
Answered.  Let it suffice thee
that thou know

Us happy, and without Love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoys
(And pure thou were created) we enjoy
In eminence, and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars:
Easier then Air with Air; if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure
Desiring; nor restrained conveyance need
As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul.
But I can now no more; the parting Sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles

Hesperian sets, my Signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love, but first of all
Him whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command; take heed least Passion sway
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free Will
Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons
The weal or woe in thee is placed; beware.
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blessed: stand fast; to stand or fall
Free in thine own Arbitrament it lies.
Perfect within, no outward aid require;
And all temptation to transgress repel.



So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction.  Since to
part,
Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose soverign goodness I adore.
Gentle to me and affable hath been
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever
With grateful Memory: thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and oft return. 



So parted they, the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his Bower.
The End of the Eighth Book.

