
Paradise Lost. BOOK XI.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            The Son of God presents to his Father the Prayers of our
first Parents now repenting, and intercedes for them: God accepts them,
but declares that they must no longer abide in Paradise;
sends Michael with a Band of Cherubim to dispossess them; but
first to reveal to Adam future things: Michaels
coming down. Adam shows to
Eve certain ominous signs; he discerns Michaels
approach, goes out to meet him: the Angel denounces their departure.
Eve's Lamenttion. Adam pleads, but submits:
The Angel leads him up to a high Hill, sets before him in vision what
shall happ'n till the Flood.


THus they in lowliest plight repentant stood
Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above
Prevenient Grace descending had removed
The stony from their hearts, & made new flesh
Regenerate grow instead, that sighs now breathed

Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight
Then loudest Oratory: yet their port
Not of mean suitors, nor important less
Seemed their Petition, then when th'ancient Pair
In Fables old, less ancient yet then these,

Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha to restore
The Race of Mankind drowned, before the Shrine
Of Themis stood devout.  To Heaven their prayers
Flew up, nor mist the way, by envious winds
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed
Dimentionless through Heavenly doors; then clad
With incense, where the Golden Altar fumed,
By their great Intercessor, came in sight
Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.



See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung
From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs
And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixed
With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring,
Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed
Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then those
Which his own hand manuring all the Trees
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen
From innocence.  Now therefore bend thine ear
To supplication, hear his sighs though mute;
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him, me his Advocate
And propitiation, all his works on me
Good or not good engraft, my Merit those
Shall perfect, and for these my Death shall pay.
Accept me, and in me from these receive
The smell of peace toward Mankind, let him live
Before thee reconciled, at least his days

Numbered, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)
To better life shall yield him, where with me
All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss,
Made one with me as I with thee am one.



To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene.

All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain, all thy request was my Decree:
But longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal Elements that know
No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foul,
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
As a distemper, gross to air as gross,
And mortal food, as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first
Distempered all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted.  I at first with two fair gifts
Created him endowed, with Happiness
And Immortality: that fondly lost,
This other served but to eternize woe;
Till I provided Death; so Death becomes
His final remedy, and after Life
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
By Faith and faithful works, to second Life,
Waked in the renovation of the just,
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed.
But let us call to Synod all the Blessed
Through Heavens wide bounds; from them I will not hide
My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they saw;
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed.



He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright Minister that watched, he blew
 His Trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general Doom.  the Angelic blast
Filled all the Regions: from their blissful Bowers
Of Amarantin Shade, Fountain or Spring,
By the waters of Life, where ere they sate
In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light
Hasted, resorting to the Summons high,
And took their Seats; till from his Throne supreme
the almighty thus pronounced his soverign Will.



O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both Good and Evil, since his taste
Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast
His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got,
Happier, had it sufficed him to have known
Good by it self, and Evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him, longer then they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain
Self-left.  Least therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the Garden forth to Till
The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.



Michael, this my behest have thou in charge,
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming Warriors, least the Fiend
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession some new trouble raise:.
has thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair,
From hallowed ground th'unholie, and denounce
To them and to their Progeny from thence


Perpetual banishment.  Yet least they faint
At the sad Sentence rigorously urged,
For I behold them softened and with tears
Bewailing their excess, all terror hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveal
To Adam what shall come in future days,
As I shall thee enlighten, intermix
My Covenant in the women's seed renewed;
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace:
And on the East side of the Garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs,
Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame
Wide waving, all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the Tree of Life:
Least Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foul, and all my Trees their prey,
With whose stolen Fruit Man once more to delude.



He ceased; and th'Archangelic Power prepared
For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each
Had, like a double Janus, all their shape
Spangled with eyes more numerous then those
Of Argus, and more wakeful then to drouze,
Charmed with Arcadian Pipe, the Pastoral Reed
Of Harms, or his opiate Rod.  Mean while
To resolute the World with sacred Light

Leucothea waked, and with fresh dews imbalmd
The Earth, when Adam and first Matron Eve

Had ended now their Orisons, and found
Strength added from above, new hope to spring
Out of despair, joy, but with fear yet linked;
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed.




Eve, easily may Faith admit, that all

The good which we enjoy, from Heaven descends;
But that from us ought should ascend to Heaven
So prevalent as to concern the mind
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer,
Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne
Even to the Seat of God.  For since I sought
By Prayer th'offended Deity to appease,
Kneeled and before him humbled all my heart,
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew
That I was heard with favour; peace returned
Home to my Breast, and to my memory
His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe;
Which then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live.  Whence Hail to thee,

Eve rightly called, Mother of all Mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live, and all things live for Man.



To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek.

 Ill worthy I such title should
belong
To me transgressor, who for thee ordained
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I who first brought Death on all, am graced
The source of life; next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsafed,
Far other name deserving.  But the Field
To labour calls us now with sweat imposed,
Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn,
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins
Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth,


I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoined
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilsome in these pleasant Walks?
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content.



So spake, so wished much-humbled Eve, but Fate
Subscribed not; Nature first gave Signs, impressed
On Bird, Beast, Air, Air suddenly eclipsed
After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight
The Bird of Jove, stooped from his aerie tour,
Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove:
Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods,
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the Forest, Hart and Hind;
Direct to the Eastern Gate was bent their flight.

Adam observed, and with his Eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmoved to Eve thus spake.



O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heaven by these mute signs in Nature shows
Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn
Us happily too secure of our discharge
From penalty, because from death released
Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust,
And thither must return and be no more.
Why else this double object in our fight
Of flight pursued in the air and ore the ground
One way the self-same hour? why in the East
Darkness ere Days mid-course, and Morning light
More orient in yon Western Cloud that draws
O'er the blew Firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends, with something heavenly fraught.



He erred not, for by this the heavenly Bands
Down from a Sky of Jasper lighted now

In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt,
A glorious Apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adams eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met

Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field Pavilion'd with his Guardians bright;
Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeared
In Dothan, covered with a Camp of Fire,
Against the Syrian King, who to surprise
One man, Assassin-like had levied War,
War unproclam'd.  The Princely Hierarch
In their bright stand, there left his Powers to seize
Possession of the Garden; he alone,
To find where Adam sheltered, took his way,
Not unperceived of Adam, who to Eve,
While the great Visitant approached, thus spake.




Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determine, or impose
New Laws to be observed; for I descry
From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill
One of the heavenly Host, and by his Gate
None of the meanest, some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above, such Majesty
Invests him coming? yet not terrible,
That I should fear, nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide,
But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended; and The Arch-Angel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man
Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Arms
A military Vest of purple flowed
Livelier then Melib??an, or the grain
Of Sarra, worn by Kings and Hero's old


In time of Truce; lris had dipped the wooff;
His starry Helm unbuckled showed him prime
In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side
As in a glistening Zodiac hung the Sword,
Satan's dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.

Adam bowd low, he Kingly from his State
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.




Adam, Heavens high behest no Preface needs:
Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou did transgress,
Defeated of his seizure many days
Given thee of Grace, wherein thou may repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
May cover: well may then thy Lord appeased
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claim;
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not; to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the Garden forth to till
The ground whence thou was taken, fitter Soil.





He added not, for Adam at the news
Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound; Eve, who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discovered soon the place of her retire.



O unexpected stroke, worse then of Death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave
Thee Native Soil, these happy Walks and Shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respite of that day
That must be mortal to us both.  O flours,
That never will in other Climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
At Even, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first opening bud, and gave ye Names,

Who now shall rear ye to the Sun, or rank
Your Tribes, and water from th'ambrosial Fount?
Thee lastly nuptial Bower, by me adorned
With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower World, to this obscure
And wilde, how shall we breath in other Air
Less pure, accustomed to immortal Fruits?



Whom thus the Angel interrupted mild.

 Lament not Eve, but
patiently resign
What justly thou has lost; nor set thy heart,
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine;
Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes
Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound;
Where he abides, think there thy native soil.




Adam by this from the cold sudden damp
Recovering, and his scattered spirits returned,
To Michael thus his humble words addressed.



Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named
Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem
Prince above Princes, gently has thou told
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us; what besides
Of sorrow and dejection and despair
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess, and only consolation left
Familiar to our eyes, all places else
Inhospitable appear and desolate,
Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can, I would not cease
To weary him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute Decree


No more avails then breath against the wind,
Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
This most afflicts me, that departing hence,
As from his face I shall be hid, deprived
His blessed countenance; here I could frequent,
With worship, place by place where he vouchsafed
Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate;
On this Mount he appeared, under this Tree
Stood visible, among these Pines his voice
I heard, here with him at this Fountain talked:
So many grateful Altars I would rear
Of grassy Turf, and pile up every Stone
Of lustre from the brook, in memory,
Or monument to Ages, and thereon
Offer sweet smelling Gumms and Fruits and Flours:
In yonder nether World where shall I seek
His bright appearances, or foot step-trace?
For though I fled him angry, yet recalled
To life prolonged and promised Race, I now
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
Of glory, and far off his steps adore.



To whom thus Michael with regard benign.

Adam, thou know Heaven his, and all the Earth. 
Not this Rock only; his Omnipresence fills
Land, Sea, and Air, and every kind that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power and warmd:
All the Earth he gave thee to possess and rule,
No despicable gift; surmise not then
His presence to these narrow bounds confined
Of Paradise or Eden: this had been
Perhaps thy Capital Seat, from whence had spread
All generations, and had hither come
From all the ends of the Earth, to celebrate

And reverence thee their great Progenitor.
But this pr??eminence thou has lost, brought down
To dwell on even ground now with thy Sons:
Yet doubt not but in Valley and in plain
God is as here, and will be found alike
Present, and of his presence many a sign
Still following thee, still compassing thee round
With goodness and paternal Love, his Face
Express, and of his steps the track Divine.
Which that thou may believe, and be confirmed
Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent
To show thee what shall come in future days
To thee and to thy Offspring; good with bad
Expect to hear, supernal Grace contending
With sinfulness of Men; thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious sorrow, equally inured
By moderation either state to bear,
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead
Safest thy life, and best prepared endure
Thy mortal passage when it comes.  Ascend
This Hill; let Eve (for I have drenched her eyes)
Here sleep below while thou to foresight wake,
As once thou sleeps, while She to life was formed.



To whom thus Adam gratefully replied.

 Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide,
the path
Thou lead me, and to the hand of Heaven submit,
However chast'ning, to the evil turn
My obvious breast, arming to overcome
By suffering, and earn rest from labour won,
If so I may attain.  So both ascend
In the Visions of God: It was a Hill
Of Paradise the highest, from whose top
The Hemisphere of Earth in clearest Ken

Stretched out to the amplest reach
Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round,
Whereon for different cause the Tempter set
Our second Adam in the Wilderness,
To show him all Earths Kingdoms and their Glory.
His Eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern Fame, the Seat
Of mightiest Empire, from the destined Walls
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can

And Samarchand by Oxus, Temirs Throne,
To Paquin of Sin??an Kings, and thence
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul

Down to the golden Chersonese, or where
The Persian in Ecbatan sate, or since
In Hispahan, or where the Russian Ksar

In Mosco, or the Sultan in Bizance,

Turchestan-born; nor could his eye not ken
Th'Empire of Negus to his utmost Port

Ercoco and the less Maritime Kings

Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind,
And Sofala thought Ophir, to the Realm
Of Congo, and Angola farthest South;
Or thence from Niger Flood to Atlas Mount
The Kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Suss,

Morocco and Algiers, and Tremisen;
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway
The World: in Spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich Mexico the seat of Motezume,
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat
Of Atabalipa, and yet unspoiled

Guiana, whose great City Geryons Sons
Call El Dorado: but to nobler sights

Michael from Adams eyes the Film removed
Which that false Fruit that promised clearer sight

Had bred; then purged with Euphrasie and Rue
The visual Nerve, for he had much to see;
And from the Well of Life three drops instilled.
So deep the power of these Ingredients pierced,
Even to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That Adam now enforced to close his eyes,
Sunk down and all his Spirits became entranced:
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled.




Adam, now open thine eyes, and first behold
Th'effects which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee, who never touched
Th'excepted Tree, nor with the Snake conspired,
Nor sinned thy sin, yet from that derive
Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds.



His eyes he opened, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves
New reaped, the other part sheep-walks and folds;
in the midst an Altar as the Land-mark stood
Rustic, of grassy sord; thither anon
A sweaty Reaper from his Tillage brought
First Fruits, the green Ear, and the yellow Sheaf,
Uncalled, as came to hand; a Shepherd next
More meek came with the Firstlings of his Flock
Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid
The Inwards and their Fat, with Incense strewed,
On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites performed.
His Offering soon propitious Fire from Heaven
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steam;
The others not, for his was not sincere;
Whereat he inlie raged, and as they talked,
Smote him into the Midriff with a stone
That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale
Groaned out his Soul with gushing blood effus'd.

Much at that sight was Adam in his heart
Dismayed, and thus in haste to th'Angel cried.



O Teacher, some great mischief hath befallen
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed;
Is Piety thus and pure Devotion paid?



They whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.

 These two are Brethren, Adam,
and to come
Out of thy loins; th'unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his Brothers Offering found
From Heaven acceptance; but the bloody Fact
Will be avenged, and th'others Faith approved
Loose no reward, though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore.  To which
our Sire.



Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death? Is this the way
I must return to native dust? O sight
Of terror, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!



To whom thus Michael.

 Death thou has seen
In his first shape on man; but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim Cave, all dismal; yet to sense
More terrible at th'entrance then within.
Some, as thou saw, by violent stroke shall die,
By Fire, Flood, Famine, by Intemperance more
In Meats and Drinks which on the Earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear; that thou may know
What misery th'inabstinence of Eve

Shall bring on men.   Immediately a
place
Before his eyes appeared, sad, noisome, dark,
A Laser-house it seemed, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased, all maladies
Of ghastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualms

Of heart-sick Agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,
Intestine Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs,
Daelig;monies Frenzy, moaping Melancholy
And Moon-struck madness, pining Atrophy,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting Pestilence,
Dropsies, and Asthma's, and Joint-racking Rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair
Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch;
And over them triumphant Death his Dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long
Drie-ey'd behold? Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of Woman born; compassion quelled
His best of Man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restrained excess,
And scarce recovering words his plaint renewed.



O miserable Mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end hear unborn.  Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather why
Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew
What we receive, would either not accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down,
Glad to be so dismissed in peace.  Can thus
Th'Image of God in man created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debas't
Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man,
Retaining still Divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And for his Makers Image sake exempt?




Their Makers Image,  answered
Michael,  then
Forsook them, when themselves they vilified
To serve ungoverned appetite, and took
His Image whom they served, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own,
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsome sickness, worthily, since they
Gods Image did not reverence in themselves.



I yield it just,  said Adam,
 and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To Death, and mix with our connatural dust;





There is,  said Michael,
 if thou well observe
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eats and drinks, seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So may thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop
Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease
Gathered, not harshly plucked, for death mature:
This is old age; but then thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
To withered weak and gray; thy Senses then
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgo,
To what thou has, and for the Air of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy Spirits down, and last consume
The Balm of Life.  To whom our
Ancestor.



Henceforth I fly not Death, nor would prolong
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit

Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendering up, and patiently attend
My dissolution. 
Michael replied.




 Nor love thy Life, nor hate;
but what thou  lives
Live well, how long or short permit to Heaven:
And now prepare thee for another sight.



He looked and saw a spacious Plain, whereon
Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds
Of Cattle grazing: others, whence the sound
Of Instruments that made melodious chime
Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moved
Their stops and chords was seen: his volant touch
Instinct through all proportions low and high
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who at the Forge
Labouring, two massy clods of Iron and Brass     
Had melted (whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale,
Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot
To some Caves mouth, or whether washed by stream
From underground) the liquid Ore he dreind
Into fit moulds prepared; from which he formed
First his own Tools; then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or graven in mettle.  After these,
But on the hither side a different sort
From the high neighbouring Hills, which was their Seat,
Down to the Plain descended: by their guise
Just men they seemed, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid, nor those things last which might preserve
Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain
Long had not walked, when from the Tents behold
A Heavy of fair Women, richly gay

In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung
Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on:
The Men though grave, eyed them, and let their eyes
Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net
Fast caught, they liked, and each his liking chose;
And now of love they treat till th'Eevning Star
Loves Harbinger appeared; then all in heat
They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke

Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invoked;
With Feast and Music all the Tents resound.
Such happy interview and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours,
And charming Symphonies attached the heart
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight,
The bent of Nature; which he thus expressed.



True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blessed,
Much better seems this Vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, then those two past;
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,
Here Nature seems fulfilled in all her ends.



To whom thus Michael.
Judge not what is best
By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet,
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those Tents thou saw so pleasant, were the Tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race
Who slew his Brother; studious they appear
Of Arts that polish Life, Inventors rare,
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledged none.
Yet they a beauteous offspring shall beget;
For that fair female Troop thou saw, that seemed
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists

Women's domestic honour and chief praise;
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roll the Eye.
To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives
Religious titl'd them the Sons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy,
(Erelong to swim at large) and laugh; for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weep.



To whom thus Adam of short joy bereft.

 O pity and shame, that they who to
live well
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenor of Mans woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.



 From Mans effeminate
slackness it begins,

 Said th'Angel,
 who should better hold  his place
By wisdom, and superior gifts received.
But now prepare thee for another Scene.



He looked and saw wide Territory spread
Before him, Towns, and rural works between,
Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towers,
Concourse in Arms, fierce Faces threatening War,
Giants of mighty Bone, and bold empress;
Part wield their Arms, part courb the foaming Steed,
Single or in Array of Battle ranged
Both Horse and Foot, nor idly mustering stood;
One way a Band select from forage drives
A herd of Beeves, fair Oxen and fair Kine
From a fat Meadow ground; or fleecy Flock,
Ewes and their bleating Lambs over the Plain,
Their Booty; scarce with Life the Shepherds fly,


But colin aide, which makes a bloody Fray;
With cruel Tournament the Squadrons join;
Where Cattle pastured late, now scattered lies
With Carcasses and Arms th'ensanguind Field
Deserted: Others to a City strong
Lay Siege, encamped; by Battery, Scale, and Mine,
Assaulting; others from the wall defend
With Dart and Jav'lin, Stones and sulphurous Fire;
On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds.
In other part the sceptred Heralds call
To Council in the City Gates: anon
Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriors mixed,
Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon
In factious opposition, till at last
Of middle Age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spake much of Right and Wrong,
Of Justice, of Religion, Truth and Peace,
And Judgment from above: him old and young
Exploded and had seized with violent hands,
Had not a Cloud descending snatched him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and Oppression, and Sword-Law
Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found.

Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turned full sad; O what are these,
Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousandfould the sin of him who slew
His Brother; for of whom such massacher
Make they but of their Brethren, men of men?
But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heaven
Rescued, had in his Righteousness bin lost?



To whom thus Michael.
 These are the product
Of those ill mated Marriages thou saw;

Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves
Abhor to join; and by imprudence mixed,
Produce prodigious Births of body or mind.
Such were these Giants, men of high renown;
For in those days Might only shall be admired,
And Valour and Heroic Virtue called;
To overcome in Battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human Glory, and for Glory done
Of triumph, to be styled great Conquerors,
Patrons of Mankind, Gods, and Sons of Gods,
Destroyers rightlier called and Plagues of men.
Thus Fame shall be achieved, renown on Earth,
And what most merits fame in silence hid.
But he the seventh from thee, whom thou behold
The only righteous in a World perverse,
And therefore hated, therefore so beset
With Foes for daring single to be just,
And utter odious Truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High
Rapt in a balmy Cloud with winged Steeds
Did, as thou saw, receive, to walk with God
High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss,
Exempt from Death; to show thee what reward
Awaits the good, the rest what punishment?
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.



He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed,
The brazen Throat of War had ceased to roar,
All now was turned to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance,
Marrying or prostituting, as befell,
Rape or Adultery, where passing fair
Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broils.


At length a Reverend Sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declared,
And testified against their ways; he oft
Frequented their Assemblies, whereso met,
Triumphs or Festivals, and to them preached
Conversion and Repentance, as to Souls
In Prison under Judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceased
Contending, and removed his Tents far off;
Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall,
Began to build a Vessel of huge bulk,
Measured by Cubit, length, and breadth, and height,
Smeared round with Pitch, and in the side a door
Contrived, and of provisions laid in large
For Man and Beast: when lo a wonder strange1
Of every Beast, and Bird, and Insect small
Came sevens, and pairs, and entered in, as taught
Their order: last the Sire, and his three Sons
With their four Wives; and God made fast the door.
Meanwhile the Southwind rose, and with black wings
Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove
From under Heaven; the Hills to their supply
Vapour, and Exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain; and now the thickened Sky
Like a dark Ceeling stood; down rushed the Rain
Impetuous, and continued till the Earth
No more was seen; the floating Vessel swum
Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting o'er the Waves, all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmed, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water rolled; Sea covered Sea,
Sea without shore; and in their Palaces
Where luxury late reigned, Sea-monsters whelped
And stabled; of Mankind, so numerous late,

All left, in one small bottom swum embarked.
How did thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
The end of all thy Offspring, end so sad,
Depopulation; thee another Flood,
Of tears and sorrow a Flood thee also drowned,
And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reared
By th'Angel, on thy feet thou stood at last,
Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns
His Children, all in view destroyed at once;
And scarce to th'Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.



O Visions ill foreseen! better had I
Lived ignorant of future, so had borne
My part of evil only, each days lot
Enough to bear; those now, that were dispensed
The burden of many Ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth
Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
With thought that they must be.  Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall
Him or his Children, evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,
And he the future evil shall no less
In apprehension then in substance feel
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped
Famine and anguish will at last consume
Wandering that watery Desert: I had hope
When violence was ceased, and War on Earth,
All would have then gon well, peace would have crowned
With length of happy days the race of man;
But I was far deceived; for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less then War to waste.
How comes it thus? unfold, Celestial Guide,
And whether here the Race of man will end.



 To whom thus Michael.
 Those whom last thou saw
In Triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true virtue void;
Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste
Subduing Nations, and achieved thereby
Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey,
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfeit, and lust, till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostile deeds in Peace.
The conquered also, and enslaved by War
Shall with their freedom lost all virtue loose
And fear of God, from whom their piety feigned
In sharp contest of Battle found no aide
Against invaders; therefore cooled in zeal
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldly or dissolute, on what their Lords
Shall leave them to enjoy; for the Earth shall bear
More then enough, that temperance may be tried:
So all shall turn degenerate, all depraved,
Justice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot;
One Man except, the only Son of light
In a dark Age, against example good,
Against allurements, custom, and a World
Offended; fearless of reproach and scorn,
Or violence, he of their wicked ways
Shall them admonish, and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe,
And full of peace, denouncing wrath to come
On their impenitence; and shall return
Of them derided, but of God observed
The one just Man alive; by his command
Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou behold,
To save himself and household from amidst

A World devote to universal rack.
No sooner he with them of Man and Beast
Select for life shall in the Ark be lodged,
And sheltered round, but all the Cataracts
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall power
Rain day and night, all fountains of the Deep
Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise
Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount
Of Paradise by might of Waves be moved
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flood,
With all his verdure spoiled, and Trees adrift
Down the great River to the opening Gulf,
And there take root an Island salt and bare,
The haunt of Seals and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang.
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now what further shall ensue, behold.



He looked, and saw the Ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen North-winde, that blowing dry
Wrinkled the face of Deluge, as decayed;
And the clear Sun on his wide watery Glass
Gazed hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew,
As after thirst, which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopped
His Sluices, as the Heaven his windows shut.
The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed.
And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appear;
With clamour thence the rapid Currents drive
Towards the retreating Sea their furious tide.


Forthwith from out the Arc a Raven flies,
And after him, the surer messenger,
A Dove sent forth once and again to spy
Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light;
The second time returning, in his Bill
An Olive leaf he brings, pacific sign:
Anon dry ground appears, and from his Arc
The ancient Sire descends with all his Train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds
A dewy Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow
Conspicuous with three listed colours gay,
Betok'ning peace from God, and Covenant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam erst so sad
Greatly rejoiced, and thus his joy broke forth.



O thou who future things can represent
As present, Heavenly instructor, I revive
At this last sight, assured that Man shall live
With all the Creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole World
Of wicked Sons destroyed, then I rejoice
For one Man found so perfect and so just,
That God vouchsafed to raise another World
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven,
Distended as the Brow of God appeased,
Or serve they as a flowery verge to bind
The fluid skirts of that same watery Cloud,
Least it again dissolve and shower the Earth?



To whom the Archangel. 
Dexterously thou aim;
So willingly doth God remit his Ire,
Though late repenting him of Man depraved,
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole Earth filled with violence, and all flesh

Corrupting each their way; yet those removed,
Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight,
That he relents, not to blot out mankind,
And makes a Covenant never to destroy
The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea
Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World
With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings
Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set
His triple-coloured Bow, whereon to look
And call to mind his Covenant: Day and Night,
Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost
Shall hold their course, till fire purge all things new,
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.
The End of the Eleventh Book.

