
            Paradise Lost. Book V.
            THE ARGUMENT.
            Morning approached, Eve relates to Adam her
troublesome  dream; he likes it not, yet comforts her: They come
forth to their  day labours; Their Morning Hymn at the Door of their Bower.
 God to  render Man inexcusable sends Raphael to admonish
him of  his obeaudience, of his free estate, of his enemy near at 
hand; who he is, and why his enemy, and whatever else may avail 
Adam to know. Raphael comes down to   Paradise,
his appearance described, his coming  discerned by Adam afar
off sitting at the door of his Bower; he  goes out to meet him, brings
him to his lodge, entertains  him with the choicest fruits of
Paradise got  together by Eve;their
discourse at Table: Raphael  performs his message, minds Adam
of his state and of his enemy;  relates at Adams request who
that enemy is, and how he came to  be so, beginning from his first
revolt in Heaven, and the  occasion thereof; how he drew his Legions
after him to the parts  of the 

 North, and there incited  them to rebel
with him, perswading all but only Abdiel a  Seraph, who
in Arguemeant dissuades and opposes him, then  forsakes him.


NOw Morn her rosie steps in the Eastern Clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with Orient Pearl,
When Adam waked, so customed, for his sleep
Was Aerie light from pure digestion bred,
And temperate vapors bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill Matin Song
Of Birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve

With Tresses discomposed, and glowing Cheek,
As through unquiet rest: he on his side
Leaning half-raised, with looks of cordial Love
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld
Beauty, which whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus.
 Awake
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heavens last best gift, my ever new delight,
Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,
What drops the Myrrh, and what the balmy Reed,
How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet.



Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye 
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake.





O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My Glory, my Perfection, glad I see
Thy face, and Morn returned, for I this Night, 

Such night till this I never passed, have dreamed,
If dreamed, not as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day passed, or morrows next design,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night;  methought
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk
With gentle voice, I though it thine; it said,
Why sleeps thou Eve?  now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake
Tunes sweetest his love-labor'd song; now reigns
Full Orbed the Moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowy sets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heaven wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the Tree
Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seemed,
Much fairer to my Fancy then by day:
And as I wondering looked, beside it stood
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven
By us oft seen; his dewy locks distilled

Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gazed;
And O fair Plant, said he, with
fruit surcharged,
Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,
Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despised?
Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offered good, why else set here?
This said he paused not, but with venturous Arm 


He plucked, he tasted; me damp horror chilled
At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold:
But he thus overjoyed,  O Fruit
Divine,
Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropped,
Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit
For God's, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant grows,
The Author not impaired, but honoured more?
Here, happy Creature, fair Angelic Eve,
Partake thou also; happy though thou art,
Happier thou may be, worthier can not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confined,
But sometimes in the Air, as wee, sometimes
Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smell
So quickened appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The Earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide
And various: wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly
My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O how glad I waked
To find this but a dream!  Thus Eve
her  Night
Related, and thus Adam answered sad.



Best image of my self and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear; 

Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure. But know that in the Soul
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,
She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,
Which Reason joining or disjoining, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell when Nature rests,
Oft in her absence mimic Fancy wakes
To imitate her; but misjoining shapes,
Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances methinks I find
Of our last Evenings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come or go, so unproved, and leave
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou did abhor to dream,
Waking thou never wilt consent to do.
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks
That wont to be more cheerful and serene
Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
That open now their choicest bosomed smells
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.



So cheered he his fair Spouse, and she was cheered,
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair;
Two other precious drops that ready stood, 

Each in their Crystal sluice, he ere they fell
Kissed as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feared to have offended.


So all was cleared, and to the Field they haste.
But first from under shady arborous roof,
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of day-spring, and the Sun, who scarce up risen
With wheels yet hovering o'er the Ocean brim,
Shot parallel to the earth his dewy ray,
Discovering in wide Landscape all the East
Of Paradise and Edens happy Plains,
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their Orisons, each Morning duly paid
In various style, for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced or sung
Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence
Flowed from their lips, in Prose or numerous Verse,
More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp
To add more sweetness, and they thus began.



These are thy glorious works, Parent of  good,
Almighty, thine this universal Frame,
Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then!
Unspeakable, who first above these Heavens
To us invisible or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works, yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine:
Speak ye who best can tell, ye Sons of light,
Angels, for ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, Day without Night,
Circle his Throne rejoicing, ye in Heaven,
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of Stars, last in the train of Night, 

If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crowns the smiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Sphere
While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime.
Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soul,
Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climbst,
And when high Noon has gained, and when thou falls.
Moon, that now meets the orient Sun, now fliest
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their Orb that flies,
And ye five other wandering Fires that move
In mystic Dance not without Song, resound
His praise, who out of Darkness called up Light,
Air, and ye Elements the eldest birth
Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceaseless change
Vary to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise
From Hill or steaming Lake, dusky or grey,
Till the Sun paint your fleecy skirts with Gold,
In honour to the Worlds great Author rise;
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd sky,
Or wet the thirsty Earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave.
Fountains and ye, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Join voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,
That singing up to Heaven gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise;
Ye that in Waters glide, and ye that walk 

The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, Morn or Even,
To Hill, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shade
Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise.
Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still
To give us only good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil or concealed,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.



So prayed they innocent, and to their thoughts
Firm peace recovered soon and wonted calm.
On to their mornings rural work they haste
Among sweet dews and flours; where any row
Of Fruit-trees overwoodie reached too far
Their pampered boughs, and needed hands to check
Fruitless embraces: or they led the Vine
To wed her Elm; she spoused about him twines
Her marriageable arms, and with her brings
Her dour the adopted Clusters, to adorn
His barren leaves. Them thus employed beheld
With pity Heavens high King, and to him called

Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deigned
To travel with Tobias, and secured
His marriage with the seven times wedded Maid.




Raphael, said he, thou hear what stir on Earth

Satan from Hell escaped through the darksome Gulf
Hath raised in Paradise, and how disturbed
This night the human pair, how he designs
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
Converse with Adam, in what Bower or shade
Thou find him from the heat of Noon retired,
To respite his day-labour with repast,
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
As may advise him of his happy state, 

Happiness in his power left free to will,
Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware
He swerve not too secure: tell him withal
His danger, and from whom, what enemy
Late fallen himself from Heaven, is plotting now
The fall of others from like state of bliss;
By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,
But by deceit and lies; this let him know,
Least wilfully transgressing he pretend
Surprise, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.



So spake the Eternal Father, and fulfilled
All Justice: nor delayed the winged Saint
After his charge received, but from among
Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he stood
Veiled with his gorgeous wings, up springing light
Flew through the midst of Heaven; the Angelic Quires
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
Through all the Empyreal road; till at the Gate
Of Heaven arrived, the gate self-opened wide
On golden Hinges turning, as by work
Divine the soverign Architect had framed.
From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,
Star interposed, however small he sees,
Not unconfirmed to the other shining Globes,
Earth and the Garden of God, with Cedars crowned
Above all Hills. As when by night the Glass
Of Galileo, less assured, observes
Imagined Lands and Regions in the Moon:
Or Pilot from amidst the Cyclades


Delos or Samos first appearing kens
A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing 

Now on the polar winds, then with quick Fann
Winnows the buxom Air;  till within soar
Of Towering Eagles, to all the Fowls he seems
A Ph??nix, gazed by all, as that sole 
Bird
When to enshrine his relics in the Sun's
Bright Temple, to ??gyptian Theb's he flies.
At once on the Eastern cliff of Paradise

He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph winged; six wings he wore, to shade
His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad
Each shoulder broad, came mantling o'er his breast
With regal Ornament; the middle pair
Girt like a Starry Zone his waste, and round
Skirted his loins and thighs with downy Gold
And colours dipped in Heaven; the third his feet
Shadowed from either heel with feathered mail
sky-tinctured grain. Like Maia's son he stood,
And shook his Plumes, that Heavenly fragrance filled
The circuit wide. Strait knew him all the Bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his state,
And to his message high in honour rise;
For on some message high they guest him bound.
The glittering Tents he passed, and now is come
Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrh,
And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nerd, and Balm;
A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here
Wantoned as in her prime, and plaid at will
Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet,
Wilde above Rule or Art; enormous bliss.
Him through the spicy Forest onward come

Adam discerned, as in the door he sat
Of his cool Bower, while now the mounted Sun
Shot down direct his fervid Rays to warm
Earths inmost womb, more warmth then Adam needs; 

And Eve within, due at her hour prepared
For dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst
Of nectarous draughts between, from milky stream,
Berry or Grape: to whom thus Adam called.



Haste hither Eve, and worth thy sight behold
Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape
Comes this way moving; seems another Morn
Risen on mid-noon;  some great behest from Heaven
To us perhaps he brings, and will voutchsafe
This day to be our Guest. But go with speed,
And what thy stores contain, bring forth and pour
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Our Heavenly stranger; well we may afford
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow
From large bestowed, where Nature multiplies
Her fertile growth, and by disburd'ning grows
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.



To whom thus Eve. 
Adam, earths  hallowed mould
Of God inspired, small store will serve, where store,
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:
But I will haste and from each bough and break,
Each Plant and juiciest Gourd will pluck such choice
To entertain our Angel guest, as he
Beholding shall confess that here on Earth
God hath dispensed his bounties as in Heaven.



So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
What choice to choose for delicacy best,
What order, so contrived as not to mix
Tastes, not well joined, inelegant, but bring
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change, 

Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk
Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yields
In India East or West, or middle shore
In Pontus or the Punic Coast, or where

Alcinous reigned, fruit of all kinds, in coat,
Rough, or smooth rind, or bearded husk, or shell
She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape
She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meads
From many a berry, and from sweet kernels pressed
She tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold
Wants her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground
With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum'd.
Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet
His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train
Accompanied then with his own complete
Perfections, in himself was all his state,
More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits
On Princes, when their rich Retinue long
Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeared with Gold
Dazzles the crowd, and sets them all agape.
Nearer his presence Adam though not old,
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superior Nature, bowing low,


Thus said.  Native of Heaven,
for other  place
None can then Heaven such glorious shape contain;
Since by descending from the Thrones above,
Those happy places thou has deigned a while
To want, and honour these, voutchsafe with us
Two only, who yet by soverign gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shady Bower
To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears
To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the Sun more cool decline. 




Whom thus the Angelic Virtue answered mild.


Adam, I therefore came, nor art thou such
Created, or such place has here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven
To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bower
Over-shades; for these mid-hours, till Evening rise
I have at will.  So to the Sylvan
Lodge
They came, that like Pomona's Arbour smiled
With flourets decked and fragrant smells; but Eve
Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair
Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feigned
Of three that in Mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven; no veil
She needed, Virtue-proof, no thought infirm
Altered her cheek. On whom the Angel Hail

Bestowed, the holy salutation used
Long after to blessed Marie, second Eve.



Hail Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb
Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons
Then with these various fruits the Trees of God
Have heaped this Table.  Raised of
grassy turf
Their Table was, and mossy seats had round,
And on her ample Square from side to side
All Autumn piled, though Spring and Autumn
here
Danced hand in hand. A while discourse they hold;
No fear lest Dinner cool; when thus began
Our Author.  Heavenly stranger,
please to taste
These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfect good unmeasured out, descends,
To us for food and for delight hath cause
The Earth to yield; unsavoury food perhaps
To spiritual Natures; only this I know,
That one Celestial Father gives to all. 





To whom the Angel.  Therefore
 what he gives
(Whose praise be ever sung) to man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ungrateful food; and food alike those pure
Intelligential substances require
As doth your Rational; and both contain
Within them every lower faculty
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustained and fed; of Elements
The grosser feeds the purer, Earth the Sea,
Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires
Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon;
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurged
Vapours not yet into her substance turned.
Nor doth the Moon no nourishment exhale
From her moist Continent to higher Orbs.
The Sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his elemental recompense
In humid exhalations, and at Even
Sups with the Ocean: though in Heaven the Trees
Of life ambrosial fruit bear, and vines
Yield Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn
We brush mellifluous Dews, and find the ground
Covered with pearly grain: yet God hath here
Varied his bounty so with new delights,
As may compare with Heaven; and to taste
Think not I shall be nice.  So down
they sat,
And to their viands fell, nor seemingly
The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss
Of Theologians, but with keen dispatch
Of real hunger, and concoctive heat 

To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpires
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire
Of sooty coal the Empires Alchemist
Can turn, or holds it possible to turn
Metals of drossiest Ore to perfect Gold
As from the Mine. Mean while at Table Eve

Ministerd naked, and their flowing cups
With pleasant liquors crowned: O innocence
Deserving Paradise! if ever, then,
Then had the Sons of God excuse to have bin
Enamoured at that sight; but in those hearts
Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy
Was understood, the injured Lovers Hell.


Thus when with meats and drinks they had sufficed,
Not burdened Nature, sudden mind arose
In Adam, not to let the occasion pass
Given him by this great Conference to know
Of things above his World, and of their being
Who dwell in Heaven, whose excellence he saw
Transcend his own so far, whose radiant forms
Divine effulgence, whose high Power so far
Exceeded human, and his wary speech
Thus to the Empyreal Minister he framed.



Inhabitant with God, now know I well
Thy favour, in this honour done to man,
Under whose lowly roof thou has Vouchsafed
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,
As that more willingly thou could not seem
As Heavens high feasts to have fed: yet what compare?



To whom the winged Hierarch replied.

 O Adam, one Almighty
is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not depraved from good, created all 


Such to perfection, one first matter all,
Endued with various forms various degrees
Of substance, and in things that live, of life;
But more refined, more spirituous, and pure,
As nearer to him placed or nearer tending
Each in their several active Spears assigned,
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds
Proportion to each kind. So from the root
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
More aerie, last the bright consummate flower
Spirits odorous breathes: flours and their fruit
Mans nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed
To vital Spirits aspire, to animal,
To intellectual, give both life and sense,
Fancy and understanding, whence the Soul
Reason receives, and reason is her being,
Discursive, or Intuitive; discourse
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,
Differing but in degree, of kind the same.
Wonder not then, what God for you saw good
If I refuse not, but convert, as you,
To proper substance; time may come when men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare:
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at last turn all to Spirit,
Improved by tract of time, and winged ascend
Ethereal, as wee, or may at choice
Here or in Heavenly Paradises dwell;
If ye be found obedient, and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire
Whose progeny you are. Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happiness this happy state
Can comprehend, incapable of more. 




To whom the Patriarch of mankind replied,

 O favourable spirit, propitious
guest,
Well has thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set
From center to circumference, whereon
In contemplation of created things
By steps we may ascend to God. But say,
What meant that caution joint,
if ye be found


Obedient? can we
want obedience then
To him, or possibly his love desert
Who formed us from the dust, and placed us here
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
Human desires can seek or apprehend?



To whom the Angel.  Son of
Heaven and  Earth,
Attend: That thou are happy, owe to God;
That thou continu'st such, owe to thy self,
That is, to thy obedience; therein stand.
This was that caution given thee; be advised.
God made thee perfect, not immutable;
And good he made thee, but to persevere
He left it in thy power, ordained thy will
By nature free, not over-ruled by Fate
Inextricable, or strict necessity;
Our voluntary service he requires,
Not our necessitated, such with him
Finds no acceptance, nor can find, for how
Can hearts, not free, be tried whether they serve
Willing or no, who will but what they must
By Destiny, and can no other choose?
My self and all the Angelic Host that stand
In sight of God enthroned, our happy state
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;
On other surety none; freely we serve,
Because wee freely love, as in our will 


To love or not; in this we stand or fall:
And some are fallen, to disobedience fallen,
And so from Heaven to deepest Hell; O fall
From what high state of bliss into what woe!



To whom our great Progenitor. 
Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted ear,
Divine instructor, I have heard, then when
Cherubic Songs by night from neighbouring Hills
Aerial Music send: nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free;
Yet that we never shall forget to love
Our maker, and obey him whose command
Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assured me, and still assure: though what thou tells
Hath past in Heaven, some doubt within me move,
But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
The full relation, which must needs be strange,
Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard;
And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun
Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins
His other half in the great Zone of Heaven.



Thus Adam made request, and Raphael

After short pause assenting, thus began.



High matter thou enjoin me, O prime of men,
Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate
To human sense the invisible exploits
Of warring Spirits; how without remorse
The ruin of so many glorious once
And perfect while they stood; how last unfold
The secrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is dispensed, and what surmounts the reach
Of human sense, I shall delineate so,
By likening spiritual to corporal forms, 

As may express them best, though what if Earth
Be but the shadow of Heaven, and things therein
Each to other like, more then on earth is thought?


As yet this world was not, and Chaos wilde
Reigned where these Heavens now roll, where Earth now rests
Upon her Center poised, when on a day
(For Time, though in Eternity, applied
To motion, measures all things durable
By present, past, and future) on such day
As Heavens great Year brings forth, the Empyreal Host
Of Angels by Imperial summons called,
Innumerable before the almighty's Throne
Forthwith from all the ends of Heaven appeared
Under their Hierarchs in orders bright
Ten thousand thousand Ensigns high advanced,
Standards, and Gonfalons between Van and Rear
Stream in the Air, and for distinction serve
Of Hierarchies, of Orders, and Degrees;
Or in their glittering Tissues bear emblazed
Holy Memorials, acts of Zeal and Love
Recorded eminent. Thus when in Orbs
Of circuit inexpressible they stood,
Orb within Orb, the Father infinite,
By whom in bliss bosomed sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming Mount, whose top
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake.



Hear all ye Angels, Progeny of Light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
Hear my Decree, which unrevok't shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My only Son, and on this holy Hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand;  your Head I him appoint;
And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow 


All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great Vicegerent Reign abide
United as one individual Soul
For ever happy: him who disobeys
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter darkness, deep engulfed, his place
Ordained without redemption, without end. 



So spake The Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemed well pleased, all seemed, but were not all.
That day, as other solemn days, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred Hill,
Mystical dance, which yonder starry Sphere
Of Planets and of fixed in all her Wheels
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentric, intervolv'd, yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem,
And in their motions harmony Divine
So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Listens delighted.  Evening now approached
(For wee have also our Evening and our Morn,
Wee ours for change delectable, not need)
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous; all in Circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled
With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows
In Pearl, in Diamond, and massy Gold
Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heaven.
On flours reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned,
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet
Quaff immortality and joy, secure
Of surfeit where full measure only bounds
Excess, before the all bounteous King, who showered
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy. 

Now when ambrosial Night with Clouds exhaled
From that high mount of God, whence light & shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed
To grateful Twilight (for Night comes not there
In darker veil) and roseate Dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest,
Wide over all the Plain, and wider far
Then all this globous Earth in Plain out spread,
(Such are the Courts of God) the Angelic throng
Dispersed in Bands and Files their Camp extend
By living Streams among the Trees of Life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reared,
Celestial Tabernacles, where they slept
Fannd with cool Winds, save those who in their course
Melodious Hymns about the soverign Throne
Alternate all night long: but not so waked

Satan, so call him now, his former name
Is heard no more in Heaven; he of the first,
If not the first Arch-Angel, great in Power,
In favour and in pr??eminence, yet fraught
With envy against the Son of God, that day
Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed

Messiah King anointed, could not bear
Through pride that sight, & thought himself impaired.
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved
With all his Legions to dislodge, and leave
Unworshipt, unobeyed the Throne supreme
Contemptuous, and his next subordinate
Awning, thus to him in secret spake.





sleeps thou Companion dear, what sleep can close
Thy eye-lids: and remember what Decree 

Of yesterday, so late hath past the lips
Of Heavens Almighty. Thou to me thy thoughts
Was wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
Both waking we were one; how then can now
Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou see imposed;
New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate
What doubtful may ensue, more in this place
To utter is not safe. Assemble thou
Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief;
Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night
Her shadowy Cloud withdraws, I am to haste,
And all who under me their Banners wave,
Homeward with flying march where we possess
The Quarters of the North, there to prepare
Fit entertainment to receive our King
The great Messiah, and his new commands,
Who speedily through all the Hierarchies
Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws.



So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infused
Bad influence into th'unwarie breast
Of his Associate; he together calls,
Or several one by one, the Regent Powers,
Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught,
That the most High commanding, now ere Night,
Now ere dim Night had disincumberd Heaven,
The great Hierarchal Standard was to move;
Tells the suggested cause, and casts between
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound
Or taint integrity; but all obeyed
The wonted signal, and superior voice
Of their great Potentate; for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heaven; 

His countenance, as the Morning Star that guides
The starry flock, allured them, and with lies
Drew after him the third part of Heavens Host:
Mean while the Eternal eye, whose sight discerns
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy Mount
And from within the golden Lamps that burn
Nightly before him, saw without their light
Rebellion rising, saw in whom, how spread
Among the sons of Morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high Decree;
And smiling to his only Son thus said.



Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of Deity or Empire, such a foe
Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North;
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try
In battle, what our Power is, or our right.
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all employ
In our defence, lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our Sanctuary, our Hill.



To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear
Lightning Divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer.  Mighty Father, thou
thy foes
Justly has in derision, and secure
Laugh at their vain designs and tumults vain,
Matter to me of Glory, whom their hate
Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power
Given me to quell their pride, and in event 

Know whether I be dextrose to subdue
Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven.



So spake the Son, but Satan with his Powers
Far was advanced on winged speed, an Host
Innumerable as the Stars of Night,
Or Stars of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun
Impearls on every leaf and every floor. 
Regions they passed, the mighty Regencies
Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones
In their triple Degrees, Regions to which
All thy Dominion, Adam, is no more
Then what this Garden is to all the Earth,
And all the Sea, from one entire globose
Stretched into Longitude; which having passed
At length into the limits of the North
They came, and Satan to his Royal seat
High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount
Raised on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towers
From Diamond Quarries hewn, and Rocks of Gold,
The Palace of great Lucifer, (so call
That Structure in the Dialect of men
Interpreted) which not long after, he
Affecting all equality with God,
In imitation of that Mount whereon

Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven,
The Mountain of the Congregation called;
For thither he assembled all his Train,
Pretending so commanded to consult
About the great reception of their King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious Art
Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears.



Thrones, Dominations, Princedomes, Virtues,  Powers,
If these magnificant Titles yet remain 

Not merely titular, since by Decree
Another now hath to himself engrossed
All Power, and us eclipsed under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,
This only to consult how we may best
With what may be devised of honours new
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile,
Too much to one, but double how endured,
To one and to his image now proclaimed?
But what if better counsels might erect
Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke?
Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend
The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know your selves
Natives and Sons of Heaven possessed before
By none, and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for Orders and Degrees
Jar not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can in reason then or right assume
Monarchy over such as live by right
His equals, if in power and splendour less,
In freedom equal? or can introduce
Law and Edict on us, who without law
Err not, much less for this to be our Lord,
And look for adoration to the abuse
Of those Imperial Titles which assert
Our being ordained to govern, not to serve?



Thus far his bold discourse without control
Had audience, when among the Seraphim

Abdiel, then whom none with more zeal adored
The Deity, and divine commands obeyed, 

Stood up, and in a flame of zeal severe
The current of his fury thus opposed.



O argument blasphemous, false and proud!
Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven
Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate
In place thy self so high above thy Peers.
Can thou with impious obloquy condemn
The just Decree of God, pronounced and sworn,
That to his only Son by right endued
With Regal Sceptre, every Soul in Heaven
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
Confess him rightful King? unjust thou say
Flatly unjust, to bind with Laws the free,
And equal over equals to let Reign,
One over all with unsucceeded power.
Shalt thou give Law to God, shalt thou dispute
With him the points of liberty, who made
Thee what thou art, and formed the Powers of Heaven
Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being?
Yet by experience taught we know how good,
And of our good, and of our dignity
How provident he is, how far from thought
To make us less, bent rather to exalt
Our happy state under one Head more near
United. But to grant it thee unjust,
That equal over equals Monarch Reign:
Thy self though great and glorious does thou count,
Or all Angelic Nature joint in one,
Equal to him begotten Son, by whom
As by his Word the mighty Father made
All things, even thee, and all the Spirits of Heaven
By him created in their bright degrees,
Crowned them with Glory, and to their Glory named 

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscured,
But more illustrious made, since he the Head
One of our number thus reduced becomes,
His Laws our Laws, all honour to him done
Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage,
And tempt not these;  but hasten to appease
Th'incensed Father, and the incensed Son,
While Pardon may be found in time besought.



So spake the fervent Angel, but his zeal
None seconded, as out of season judged,
Or singular and rash, whereat rejoiced
the apostate, and more haughty thus replied.

 That we were formed then say thou?
and the work
Of secondary hands, by task transferred
From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
Doctrine which we would know whence learnt: who saw
When this creation was? remember thou
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised
By our own quickening power, when fatal course
Had circled his full Orb, the birth mature
Of this our native Heaven, Ethereal Sons.
Our puissance is our own, our own right hand
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try
Who is our equal: then thou shalt behold
Whether by supplication we intend
Address, and to begirt the almighty Throne
Beseeching or besieging. This report,
These tidings carry to the anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight. 




He said, and as the sound of waters deep
Hoarse murmur echoed to his words applause
Through the infinite Host, nor less for that
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone
Encompassed round with foes, thus answered bold.



O alienate from God, O spirit accursed,
Forsak'n of all good; I see thy fall
Determined, and thy hapless crew involved
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread
Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke
Of Gods Messiah; those indulgent Laws
Will not be now Vouchsafed, other Decrees
Against thee are gon forth without recall;
That Golden Sceptre which thou did reject
Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and break
Thy disobedience. Well thou did advise,
Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly
These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrath
Impending, raging into sudden flame
Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel
His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
Then who created thee lamenting learn,
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know.



So spake the Seraph Abdiel faithful found,
Among the faithless, faithful only he;
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
unshaken, unseduc'd, unterrifi'd
His Loyalty he kept, his Love, his Zeal;
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
Though single. From amidst them forth he passed, 

Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained
Superior, nor of violence feared aught;
And with retorted scorn his back he turned
On those proud Towers to swift destruction doomed.
The End of the Fifth Book.

